The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
David Alan Harrison
Introduction
Mr David Alan Harrison died at his home, 40 Talbot Road, Hyde on Friday, 3rd
January 1997 at the age of 47. He had been a patient of Shipman for a number of years and had followed Shipman when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He thought highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Harrison's death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the available medical records and cremation documentation, the death of Mr Harrison was suspicious. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Harrison's sister, Mrs Beryl Slater (Mr Harrison's cousin) and Mr Eamon O'Carroll (a paramedic). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Harrison but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mr Harrison's sister and from Mrs Irene White (the home help for Mr Harrison and his parents), Mr and Mrs Geoffrey Tinsley (Mr Harrison's neighbours), Mr Joseph Slater (Mrs Slater's husband) and Mr Alan Oakes (an ambulance technician). The Inquiry has had access to Mr Harrison's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documentation for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Harrison lived with his elderly parents. He was a solitary individual who had never enjoyed good health. His parents were also in poor health and his father was quite confused. In the months leading up to his death, Mr Harrison's health deteriorated. Shipman was a frequent visitor to the house. He would sometimes call unannounced, especially if he was calling to see Mrs Harrison.
Mr Harrison's sister recalls an incident in the spring of 1996, when she received a telephone call from her brother who said that he felt ill and had fallen. He added that he had telephoned for the doctor but he had not yet arrived. She went to the house and could see that Mr Harrison was gasping for breath and was finding it difficult to speak. She thought he was having a panic attack. She recalls that Shipman came and administered an injection. She does not know what the injection was but it seemed to help. She recalls that her brother was subsequently taken to hospital by ambulance and remained an inpatient at Tameside General Hospital for about three weeks.
Mr Harrison's computerised general practitioner records contain the following three entries for 29th
April 1996, which clearly relate to this episode:
'29/04/96
Emergency hospital admission'
'29/04/96
Seen in own home
Dr H F Shipman'
'29/04/96
Collapse - symptom
?mi admit tgh as emergency'
.
Thus, it would seem that Shipman diagnosed a possible myocardial infarction. If Mr Harrison were in pain or distress, it would have been appropriate for Shipman to administer a small dose of morphine. However, the note contains no reference to the administration of any drug.
The Lloyd George envelope contains a discharge summary sheet and a letter (dated 5th
July 1996) which record that Mr Harrison was admitted to hospital on 28th
April 1996 complaining of chest pain. The pain was
'pulling-like'
in nature on the left side of his chest and was present on walking or following food, although it was relieved by rest. An electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed no changes and Mr Harrison's cardiac enzymes were not raised. When discharged on 13th
May 1996, no clear diagnosis had been made. The discharge summary sheet records that he was discharged on Buccal Suscard, aspirin, Imdur, nicorandil and atenolol, which would suggest that his chest pain was thought to have a cardiac origin.
On 30th
May 1996, Mr Harrison underwent a full exercise tolerance test at Tameside General Hospital to determine the cause of his shortness of breath, but the cause remained unclear. He was reviewed at Tameside General Hospital on 12th
June 1996, when he described a history of chest pain on exertion on the left side of his chest. It was noted that he did not use a glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) spray because his pain was relieved without it. He reported no shortness of breath. On examination his pulse was said to be 70 beats per minute and his blood pressure was 130/80. His lungs were clear and heart sounds were normal. An ECG revealed normal sinus rhythm at 59 beats per minute.
Mr Harrison was readmitted to hospital on 10th
July 1996 complaining of chest pain of a
'tightening'
nature. The pain was associated with sweating and shortness of breath. He also had a three day history of cough and green sputum. A past history of angina and myocardial infarction was recorded. He was found to be febrile. He complained of loss of weight. An ECG was normal. Lung function tests showed increased residual volume, which can be a sign of emphysema. A diagnosis of emphysema and reversible airway obstruction was made and Mr Harrison was discharged on 19th July 1996, with a Bricanyl turbohaler. Mr Harrison noted in his diary that this new diagnosis led to a change in his medication. Mr Harrison's sister, who refers to the diary entry, recalls the new diagnosis and that Shipman was annoyed when the hospital changed Mr Harrison's medication following this diagnosis.
Mr Harrison was reviewed in Dr Husaini's clinic in December 1996. It was noted that he was generally unwell with little energy, poor appetite and had recently suffered numerous virus infections. He was always quite short of breath and occasionally experienced left-sided chest pains, which could occur at any time. It was recorded that his bowels had been irregular for many years and had been particularly bad for the previous two months. He also reported passing some blood rectally. On examination heart sounds were normal. Urea, electrolytes and liver function tests were carried out and a full blood count was taken and reported as normal. It was explained to Mr Harrison that he had emphysema and that he was to continue with his current medication. What that medication was is not clear. In view of his rectal bleeding, a barium enema was also requested.
Mr Harrison's sister recalls that, towards the end of 1996, it was evident that he was 'really quite ill' and, although he did not stay in bed all the time, he was spending more time in bed than was usual.
According to Dr Grenville, a diagnosis of ischaemic heart disease had never been satisfactorily confirmed or refuted by the hospital.
The Day of the Death
It appears that Mr Harrison telephoned Shipman's surgery on the day of his death, requesting a home visit. The medical notes and records contain a visit request slip which reads as follows:
'VISIT REQUEST
TIME MESSAGE RECEIVED: 12.10
PATIENTS NAME: DAVID HARRISON
DATE:
AGE:
3/1/97
47
ADDRESS: 40 TALBOT RD
HYDE
DETAILS: WEAK DIZZY
S.O.B.
(
shortage of breath
)
over last
few days none at present
Has had chest pain
CAN THEY GET DOWN TO SURGERY? NO
says too weak & dizzy
IF NOT, WHY NOT?'
.
There are two separate handwritten entries in Mr Harrison's medical records for 3rd
January 1997. The first says:
'3/1/97 chest pain tight in throat
sweaty - attacks for 7 days
Dyspnoea even on talking
Pain
(
radiating to
)
L arm
3/1/97
(
continued on a separate card
)
O/E
110/70 JVP
HS I II
(
heart sounds normal
)
basal creps
Clinically? CT'
.
Dr Grenville has observed that this description of pain is different from the previously described chest pain, which was always on the left side. The pain had not previously been recorded as a feeling of tightness in the throat, nor as radiating into the left arm. Both of these symptoms are suggestive of anginal pain. In Dr Grenville's opinion, the examination as recorded by Shipman is suggestive of mild heart failure and the history and examination taken together would suggest a heart attack. In Dr Grenville's view, Mr Harrison's subsequent collapse and death are consistent with the recorded history and examination. The question, of course, is whether the note is a genuine record. The computerised records, made the following day, contain a similar but more succinct note of the same events.
Early that afternoon, Mrs Slater was at home when she received a telephone call from Shipman. He asked whether she was connected to the Harrisons and, when she confirmed that she was, he said that he was at their house and added, 'They could do with some help here'. Mrs Slater initially thought that there was a problem with her uncle but Shipman said, 'It's David'. The weather was bad. There was snow on the ground and Mrs Slater's journey with her husband took a considerable time.
The Greater Manchester Ambulance Service records show that Shipman called for emergency help at 3.37pm and said that he would wait at the scene until the ambulance arrived. There was a delay of a few minutes before an ambulance was allocated to the call at 3.44pm. It was mobile at 3.49pm and arrived on the scene at 3.51pm. The Greater Manchester Ambulance Service report entitled 'Diagnosing the Fact of Adult Death' records:
'Own GP on scene doing CPR until Paramedic
crew attended
(
with
)
ECG to witness Asystole
(
sic
)
rhythm.
GP Certified at scene'
.
Mr O'Carroll told the police that, when he arrived at 3.51pm, he was met at the kitchen door by Shipman, who said words to the effect that 'He's dead this chap. I'm a friend of the family, can I use your monitor?' Shipman seemed reluctant for Mr O'Carroll to enter the house and asked to use the ECG equipment himself. Mr O'Carroll, however, insisted on seeing that the equipment was used correctly and accompanied Shipman into the house. They both went upstairs and into a bedroom. Mr O'Carroll recalls seeing Mr Harrison lying face up on a bed, fully clothed. Mr O'Carroll was unable to detect a heartbeat and, at that stage, Shipman said that he was willing to issue a death certificate. At no time did Mr O'Carroll see Shipman perform any cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), although Shipman said that he had tried CPR on Mr Harrison. Mr O'Carroll found this strange because Mr Harrison was on a bed and not a hard surface, which is required for effective CPR. Shipman said that he had arrived at the house to find Mr Harrison in cardiac arrest and explained that he had been called to the house because Mr Harrison had been ill during the day.
The second handwritten entry in the medical records for the day says:
'3/1/97
Collapse
1530 hrs
ambulance 1545 - ECG -
certified dead at 1545 hours
HFS'
.
Shipman made a very brief entry in the computerised record for 3rd
January, indicating that on examination Mr Harrison was dead at 3.30pm and noting the causes of death he was later to put on the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD).
By the time Mr and Mrs Slater arrived, the ambulance had gone. They found Shipman standing in the hall with Mr Harrison's father, who appeared very confused. Mrs Harrison was walking down the stairs. Shipman stroked his beard and said, 'We couldn't do anything'. He never actually said that Mr Harrison had died, but Mrs Slater gathered as much from what he was saying. He told the family the various things that he had done and used long words and medical terms that Mrs Slater did not understand. He also said that the paramedics had tried to resuscitate Mr Harrison, which was untrue.
Mr Slater recalls seeing Mr Harrison's body on the bed. He looked as if he had died in his sleep. There was no expression of pain on his face. His body could have been 'laid out' after the death.
The Aftermath
On Monday, 6th
January 1996, Mr Harrison's sister visited Shipman in his surgery. She had been away on holiday at the time of the death and wanted to know what had happened. Her parents were unable to tell her. Shipman explained that Mr Harrison had died because of his heart disease. He said that he had 'got him round once but he had started to go again and that he had called an ambulance'. Shipman said that the ambulance personnel were going to intubate Mr Harrison but he was already dead by the time they arrived. Shipman said that Mr Harrison had suffered a heart attack some two to three days before his death. He added that he had received a telephone call from Mr Harrison on the day of his death saying that he was not well.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD. He said that he had seen Mr Harrison alive on the day of his death. He certified that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis, which had begun about one to two hours before the death. He said that the thrombosis was due to ischaemic heart disease, from which Mr Harrison had suffered for 12 months. Chronic obstructive airways disease had contributed to the death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that the death had occurred at
'1530 hrs'
on 3rd
January 1997. He stated that he attended Mr Harrison during his last illness for a period of one hour and had seen him immediately before his death. He stated that he had made a complete external examination of the body immediately after death. The causes of death were stated as on the MCCD. The mode of death was said to be collapse lasting minutes. When asked to what extent his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own views or on statements made by others, he wrote:
'own
Ambulance crew'
. As it is plain that the ambulance crew did not arrive until after Mr Harrison was dead, it is hard to see what information they could have contributed. Shipman stated that
'self
Ambulance Crew
Parents'
were present at the moment of death. Again, it was false to assert that the ambulance crew was present at the death.
The Expert Evidence
Following his consideration of the medical records and the cremation documentation, Professor Baker assessed the level of suspicion in the case to be moderate.
I have dealt with the evidence of Dr Grenville above.
Conclusion
There are several suspicious circumstances surrounding this death.
The first and most obvious cause for suspicion is that the death occurred when Shipman was present. Dr Grenville has said that it is most unusual for a patient to die during a visit by a general practitioner unless the patient is terminally ill or the doctor has been called out in an emergency where there is a report that the patient is suffering symptoms indicating a life threatening condition such as a heart attack or stroke. Mr Harrison was not known to be terminally ill. Nor had his visit request, made at 12.10pm, been expressed to be an emergency. Nor was it treated as such by the surgery staff or by Shipman. Shipman did not visit until 2.30pm, on his own account. He had only one other visit that day and a relatively light surgery list. If this had been an emergency, he could have been there much sooner. According to Shipman's accounts, taken from Form B and the MCCD, Mr Harrison began to have his heart attack at some time between 1.30pm and 2.30pm, that is well over an hour after he had telephoned the surgery. He then died at 3.30pm, after Shipman had supposedly been with him for an hour. While it could not be said to be an impossible course of events, it does seem to be something of a coincidence that Mr Harrison should suddenly collapse and die during Shipman's visit. I find that suspicious.
My suspicions are also aroused by Shipman's apparent conduct in respect of the ambulance. If Shipman arrived at about 2.30pm and found Mr Harrison in the condition described in the first handwritten note for 3rd
January, it is very strange that Shipman did not call the ambulance until 3.38pm. On his own account, he seems to have waited until Mr Harrison was in cardiac arrest.
I am also doubtful of the authenticity of Shipman's medical note. I have found many cases in which Shipman has fabricated a medical note to provide a plausible explanation for the death which Shipman himself had caused. Here, Shipman presents a picture of a man who has had chest pain (extending into the neck and left arm and highly suggestive of angina) for seven days. The picture presented by the visits request form is that he had had chest pain for a few days but not at present. It appears that the pain had not been of such severity that Mr Harrison had called out the doctor before. I bear in mind that some patients might hesitate to call out a doctor over the New Year holiday but the previous day, Thursday, 2nd
January, was a normal working day. I doubt if many patients would hesitate to call the doctor out if suffering from severe chest pains. I suspect that the account given by Shipman in the medical records paints a rather more serious picture than was the position. However, I would not attach great weight to this factor were it not for Shipman's failure to call an ambulance promptly. That factor, combined with the serious picture presented in the note, makes me highly suspicious.
Shipman claimed that he had given Mr Harrison cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Yet, he does not appear to have laid Mr Harrison on a firm surface. Probably the only available firm surface would have been the floor. It would be surprising if Shipman had put Mr Harrison on the floor, attempted resuscitation and having failed lifted him single-handedly back onto the bed. I suspect that no such attempt was made.
Mr Harrison was clearly unwell in the weeks and months before his death. However, it had never been clearly demonstrated that he suffered from ischaemic heart disease or any other cardiac condition. Yet Shipman asserted that he had been suffering from ischaemic heart disease for a year before his death. That assertion was not borne out by the hospital investigations. If Mr Harrison really had died a sudden natural death during the afternoon of 3rd
January, Shipman should have referred the case to the coroner with a view to post-mortem examination.
Shipman falsely stated on Form B that the ambulance personnel were present at the moment of death and had provided information from which Shipman had been able to diagnose the cause of death and describe the mode of death. Shipman often claimed that others were present at the moment of death, when the truth was that he had been alone with the patient. In this case, it is not known whether or not Mr Harrison's parents were present at the death. Mr Harrison's sister says that her parents did not usually stay with their son when the doctor called to see him. They were elderly and confused.
Mr Harrison's appearance in death was not typical of a death from coronary thrombosis but was very similar to that of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of opiate.
I have come to the conclusion that Shipman killed Mr Harrison. Mr Harrison was in poor health and it is theoretically possible that he died a natural death while Shipman was in the house, remarkable though the coincidence would have been. However, Shipman's account of events as set out in Form B, the MCCD and the medical record is so implausible that I am left in no doubt that he was responsible for Mr Harrison's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001