The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ellen Higson
Introduction
Mrs Ellen Higson died at her home, 1 Marler Road, Hyde on Monday, 4th
February 1985 at the age of 84. She had been a patient of Shipman for about seven years and thought very highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was renal failure.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker notified the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the information contained in the cremation certificate, the death of Mrs Higson was highly suspicious. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Irene Allen (Mrs Higson's daughter), Mrs Janice Ann Cockcroft (Mrs Higson's granddaughter) and Mrs Lynne Booth (Mrs Higson's niece). An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mrs Allen and Mrs Cockcroft. The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1985. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville. The medical records have not survived.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Some time after the death of her second husband in 1969, Mrs Higson was diagnosed as suffering from a thyroid disorder, which was treated with medication. Later in her life, she developed arthritis and rheumatism. Her condition gradually deteriorated and her daughter visited her every week to assist with her cleaning and ironing. Mrs Higson was admitted to hospital suffering from glaucoma four years before her death. Following her discharge from hospital, she stayed with her daughter for about a month before returning to her own flat. She refused to live in a nursing home. She was very independent and mentally alert. After she had returned to her flat, Mrs Allen was frequently visited by a friend and neighbour, Mrs Priscilla Holt (known as Cilla). These visits were arranged under a local 'Friendly Neighbour Scheme' and Mrs Holt provided extensive daily help.
At the end of 1984, Mrs Allen's husband was very ill and she was unable to see her mother regularly. They spoke to each other on the telephone. In the middle of January, Mrs Higson told her daughter that she was feeling ill. Mrs Allen went to see her and found that she looked pale. She thought that she had a cold or possibly mild influenza.
Mrs Booth told the police that she would usually see her aunt once a week but would visit every day if she were ill. As far as Mrs Booth was aware, Mrs Higson's only illness in the weeks before her death was influenza. Mrs Booth recalls that, about a week before she died, her aunt telephoned her and said that Shipman had told her he would be coming round to give her a blood transfusion. Mrs Booth was puzzled and telephoned Shipman for an explanation. He said that Mrs Higson had misunderstood what he said and that he had told Mrs Higson that, if she became anaemic, he would have to give her a blood transfusion.
The visits book indicates that Shipman probably saw Mrs Higson on 3rd
January 1985, 9th
January 1985, 30th
January 1985 and 1st
February 1985. The entry for 9th
January reads,
'Higson 1 Marler Road D/N'
, probably signifying that Shipman requested a visit from the district nurse. The entry for 1st
February 1985 reads,
'Higson 1 Marler Rd bloods'
, probably signifying that, on that occasion, Shipman intended to take a blood sample.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Higson's name does not appear in the visits book for 4th
February 1985.
Mrs Booth told the police that, at about 9.30am on 4th
February 1985, she received a telephone call from Mrs Holt informing her of her aunt's death. She immediately went to her aunt's house where only Mrs Holt was present. She recalls seeing her aunt sitting in a living room chair. She was fully clothed and had her false teeth in. She appeared to have just 'drifted away'. A short while later, Mrs Booth's mother, Mrs Ruth Cooper, and Mrs Booth's sister, Mrs Pat Mooney, arrived.
Mrs Cockcroft also went to the house and saw her grandmother sitting in an armchair, looking as though she had fallen asleep whilst watching television. She was sitting upright and was still wearing her glasses. Her hands were in her lap, palms down, which was the way she always sat. She was wearing a long-sleeved cardigan and a pinafore. She looked peaceful and appeared to be of 'normal colour'. As far as Mrs Cockcroft is aware, neither the police nor an ambulance was called. About half an hour later, the undertakers came to remove the body.
The Aftermath
Following the death, Mrs Holt told Mrs Allen that she was holding Mrs Higson's hand as she was dying. Mrs Holt said that Shipman was present and had told her at one point to 'let her go'. The Inquiry sought to elicit further detail from Mrs Allen with regard to this conversation, but she told the Inquiry that her conversation with Mrs Holt was very short and that she could not remember any more about what Shipman said or did.
The Inquiry contacted Mrs Holt in an effort to learn more about the circumstances surrounding Mrs Higson's death. Unfortunately, Mrs Holt, who is now 88 years old, cannot remember these events clearly and was unable to help the Inquiry.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) is not available but the Inquiry is in possession of its counterfoil on which Shipman recorded that the date of death was 4th
February 1985 and that he had last seen Mrs Higson alive on 1st
February 1985. He said that the cause of death was renal failure. He had seen the body after death and there would be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate on which he stated that death had occurred at about midday on 4th
February 1985. Shipman said that he had attended Mrs Higson during her last illness for a period of two weeks. Shipman gave the cause of death as renal failure and, as he identified no underlying cause, this must also have been the last illness. He said that the mode of death was a coma lasting
'hours only'
and that no one had nursed Mrs Higson during her last illness. He said that he was present at the moment of death together with the home help. This last statement contradicts his earlier statement that he had last seen Mrs Higson alive on 1st
February 1985.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Baker classified the death as highly suspicious on the basis of the cremation documentation.
Dr Grenville says that a person dying of renal failure tends to become comatose and is usually nursed in bed. It is highly unlikely that such a patient would be found after death sitting upright in a chair. Dr Grenville has observed that there is nothing in the witness evidence in this case to confirm or refute the assertion that Mrs Higson was suffering from renal failure. He says that the similarities between the circumstances of Mrs Higson's death and those deaths where Shipman is known to have murdered the patient are so great that Mrs Higson's death must be regarded as suspicious.
Conclusion
There are some very suspicious features surrounding this death. It is clear from Form B that the death occurred while Shipman was present. That always arouses suspicion. In his generic evidence to the Inquiry, Dr Grenville said that it is an enormous coincidence for a doctor to be present at the death of a patient at home, where the patient is not suffering from a terminal illness and the doctor is not responding to an emergency call following the onset of acute symptoms, indicating, for example, a heart attack or stroke. Dr Grenville says that this type of unusual occurrence might occur once in a general practitioner's professional lifetime. Shipman was present at the deaths of a number of his patients who died at home. Such events cannot be coincidence. Mrs Higson was not suffering from a terminal illness and there is no indication that she was suffering from acute symptoms that might indicate a heart attack or stroke. Indeed, Shipman claimed that her death was caused by renal failure as opposed to any type of sudden death. Therefore, that Shipman should be present at the moment of death is a highly suspicious feature in its own right.
It would appear that, for some time before her death, Mrs Higson had required domestic help. It is known that she had arthritis, rheumatism, glaucoma and a thyroid problem. It seems likely that she might have been anaemic. The visits book suggests that she was receiving regular visits from Shipman throughout January and that she also received at least one visit from the district nurse. I infer from this that Mrs Higson was rather more seriously unwell than the family now recollects. Without the medical records it is impossible to assess the seriousness of her condition. It is inconceivable, however, that Mrs Higson could have been critically ill. Her family had not been told and there does not appear to have been any suggestion of admission to hospital. Mrs Holt would have told the family if she had been worried about Mrs Higson. It seems to me highly unlikely therefore that Mrs Higson could have reached the terminal stages of renal failure. As Dr Grenville has said, such a patient would have required nursing in bed and would not be found sitting upright in her chair. I think it highly unlikely that Mrs Higson died of renal failure.
It is theoretically possible that Mrs Higson died suddenly from a heart attack or stroke or some other cause of sudden death. However, that can be discounted, as Shipman would not have relied on renal failure as a cause of death if Mrs Higson had indeed suffered a heart attack or stroke in his presence.
It appears that Mrs Holt was holding Mrs Higson's hand as she was dying. It might seem unlikely for Shipman to administer a lethal injection in the presence of a witness but the Inquiry has discovered cases where Shipman has killed even in the presence of an experienced nurse or carer. One such case is Mrs Eileen Daphne Crompton, who was killed by Shipman at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly on 2nd
January 1997, in the presence of an experienced care worker, who was completely taken in by his explanation for what occurred. It would seem that Shipman's powers of persuasion were such that he was able to explain his actions in an innocent way. In any event, it is quite possible that Mrs Holt was not present when Shipman examined Mrs Higson and gave her an injection and only allowed Mrs Holt to return when Mrs Higson was close to death.
The position in which Mrs Higson was found is inconsistent with her having died of renal failure but it is consistent with her having died from an injection of opiate.
Taking these factors into account, I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Higson by administering a lethal dose of strong opiate. It is theoretically possible that Shipman was called because Mrs Higson was suddenly taken very ill and that she died a natural death in his presence, but taking the evidence as a whole I confidently dismiss that possibility.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001