The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ada Heywood
Introduction
Mrs Ada Heywood died at her home, 27 Green Street, Hyde on Sunday, 12th
November 1978 at the age of 78. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. The death was referred to the coroner, probably because of a recent fall, and following a post-mortem examination, but without an inquest being held, the cause of death was certified to be left ventricular failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
The police did not investigate the death.
In spring 2001, the Inquiry undertook a review of files held by the South Manchester Coroner and since Mrs Heywood's file suggested that she might have been seen by Shipman on the day of her death, the death was investigated and expert evidence was obtained.
The coroner's file to which the Inquiry had access comprised the Report of Death to the Coroner, the Report of Sudden Death (Form 751) and the Medical History in the Case of Sudden Death (Form 751A) prepared by the Greater Manchester Police, in addition to the post-mortem examination report. The Inquiry has also obtained reports from Dr John Grenville and Professor Helen Whitwell. The medical records have not survived and no witness evidence is available.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Heywood was a widow and lived alone. According to Forms 751 and 751A, she suffered from bronchitis and asthma. On Friday, 10th
November 1978, she had a fall and was taken to the Accident & Emergency Department at Tameside General Hospital. She was treated for lacerations to her nose before being discharged.
The Day of the Death
It is very difficult to discover what happened on the evening of Mrs Heywood's death. The information within Forms 751 and 751A, which is all that is available, is imprecise and contradictory.
According to Form 751, at about 8.10pm on 12th
November, Mrs Heywood became short of breath and started mumbling. The source of that information is not stated. The same document states that Mrs Heywood was found dead by her brother, Mr Gordon Harrison, at 8.50pm. The Report of Death to the Coroner also states that Mrs Heywood was 'found dead at home'. One might infer from those entries that Mr Harrison had not been present at the moment of his sister's death. However, Form 751A states that Mr Harrison last saw his sister alive at 8.50pm. In other words, it suggests that he was present at the moment of death. This contradicts the entry in Form 751 and also leaves open the possibility that Mr Harrison was present at the onset of the breathing difficulties at 8.10pm. According to Form 751, when the breathing difficulties began, the doctor was called but Mrs Heywood was dead when he arrived at 9.10pm. Shipman was the doctor. Question 13 on Form 751 asks whether the deceased was seen by a doctor whilst living or after death and, if so, where and by whom. It is recorded that Mrs Heywood was seen by Shipman at home on Friday, 12th
November. This is most confusing as 12th
November was a Sunday and the previous Friday was 10th
November, the day of Mrs Heywood's fall, not the day of her death. Perhaps the inference which should be drawn is that Shipman saw Mrs Heywood on Friday, 10th
November (possibly after her return from hospital) and did not then see her until after her death. Doing the best I can on the very limited information available, I think it likely that Mr Harrison was with his sister when she began to suffer breathing difficulties at about 8.10pm. Probably Mr Harrison telephoned for Shipman but Mrs Heywood had died by the time he arrived. If that is right, there would seem to be no reason to suspect that Shipman played a sinister role in Mrs Heywood's death. However, the position is by no means clear.
The Post-Mortem Examination
The post-mortem examination was carried out by Dr A S Day on 14th
November 1978. On external examination he noted abrasions on the bridge of the nose and over the right eyebrow. These were no doubt caused by the fall two days before the death.
On internal examination Dr Day found a moderate degree of oedema and congestion in both lungs. In the heart, there was thickening of the left ventricular myocardium. The coronary vessels and aorta showed severe atheromatous changes. Dr Day concluded that the cause of death was left ventricular failure due to ischaemic heart disease and that the injuries sustained in the fall on 10th
November 1978 had no bearing on the immediate cause of death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Whitwell has considered the post-mortem examination report and other documentation available to the Inquiry. She noted that Mrs Heywood suffered from severe ischaemic heart disease consistent with the stated cause of death. She accepted that the presence of oedema and congestion in the lungs would indicate a degree of left ventricular failure.
Dr Grenville concluded that the history of shortness of breath and mumbling leading to death within 40 minutes would be entirely consistent with the certified causes of death. The only toxic substance which Dr Grenville could think of which might cause breathlessness, leading to 'mumbling' and death was an oral beta-blocker. Such a drug, if given to a patient with asthmatic tendencies, can produce an acute asthmatic attack. This would be a very uncertain method of causing death. In any event, this can be ruled out, as the post-mortem findings were not consistent with death from an asthmatic attack.
There is no clear evidence that Shipman saw Mrs Heywood on the day of her death while she was still alive.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Heywood died a natural death. Although the information about the circumstances of the death is not as clear as I would wish, there is no reason to think that Shipman saw Mrs Heywood shortly before her death. Nor does it appear that she was 'found dead' as the report of death to the coroner suggested. It appears that her brother was probably with her throughout the final episode.
The findings on post-mortem examination demonstrated severe ischaemic heart disease as well as pathology consistent with left ventricular failure. The little information we have as to the circumstances leading up to Mrs Heywood's death is consistent with the certified causes of death. The evidence tends to suggest that Shipman was called to the house when Mrs Heywood was taken ill but did not arrive until after her death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001