The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Frank Halliday
Introduction
Mr Frank Halliday died at his home, 21 Saxon Avenue, Dukinfield on Monday, 30th
March 1987 at the age of 76. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Halliday's death was coronary thrombosis.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the available medical records and the information contained in the cremation certificate, the death of Mr Halliday was highly suspicious. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mr John Alfred Hefferan, Mr Halliday's nephew. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr John Hefferan and from his brother, Mr Robert Stanley Hefferan. The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Halliday's general practitioner records and Shipman's visits book for 1987.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Until the 1970s, Mr Halliday lived in Glasgow, next door to his sister, Mrs Maude Hefferan, the mother of Mr Robert Hefferan and Mr John Hefferan. She has since died. Mr Halliday was divorced from his first wife in the 1950s and, after the death of Mrs Hefferan's husband in 1967, Mr Halliday moved in to live with her. The arrangement worked well. Mrs Hefferan looked after her brother and the pair provided company for each other. At some stage, Mr Halliday met his second wife, who was from Manchester, and he moved south to be with her. When she died, Mrs Hefferan moved to Hyde to look after Mr Halliday. She kept a base in Scotland, but would come to Hyde for three or four months and then return to Scotland for a week or so. This was the arrangement at the time of Mr Halliday's death.
Mr Halliday had a number of quite serious health problems, including chronic bronchitis and emphysema, which were probably related to his smoking habit. In October 1982, he underwent surgery for prostate cancer, from which he made a reasonable recovery. In the following year, he was admitted to hospital suffering from shortness of breath, weight loss and lethargy. These were attributed to pulmonary fibrosis. He improved with treatment and was reviewed from time to time. At review in January 1985, he was said to be suffering from chronic obstructive airways disease (COAD) with 'residual heart failure'. However, when seen by Dr H H Wan, consultant physician in geriatric medicine, at Tameside General Hospital on 29th
April 1985, no signs of cardiac failure were detected. Dr Wan suspected that Mr Halliday might have carcinomatosis but further investigations excluded that diagnosis. Mr Halliday was said to have lost weight, to have vitamin B
12
deficiency and poor mobility.
Mr John Hefferan recalls that he last saw Mr Halliday alive about two months before his death. His mother had telephoned to say that Mr Halliday was in hospital because of his chest difficulties. Soon afterwards, Mr John Hefferan happened to be visiting friends in the Lake District and came down to Hyde to see his uncle. He did not think that Mr Halliday was seriously ill and he does not recall his mother being concerned about Mr Halliday's condition. It may be that Mr John Hefferan is mistaken about the timing of this visit, as according to his medical records, Mr Halliday was last admitted to hospital in October 1985. At that time, he was complaining of pain in his lower limbs associated with paraesthesia and poor mobility. The diagnosis was osteoarthritis, osteoporosis and peripheral vascular disease. This may well be the admission described by Mr John Hefferan.
The general practitioner records are very sparse and are probably incomplete. The Lloyd George cards do not, for example, refer to a hospital admission in October 1985. In the year before the death, they reveal an episode of acute low back pain in June 1986, for which painkillers were prescribed. On 18th
December 1986, Mr Halliday was prescribed Ossopan (a calcium supplement), Burinex K (a diuretic with potassium), Lanoxin-PG (prescribed for heart failure), folic acid, temazepam (a sleeping tablet) and Co-codamol, which is given for pain relief. Mr Halliday's name appears in Shipman's visits book for that day.
The last medical record before the day of the death notes a chest infection on 14th
January 1987, for which there is a corresponding entry in the visits book. There is a further visit recorded in the visits book for 16th January but there is no note in the medical record for that day.
The Death
There is no available witness evidence as to the immediate circumstances of Mr Halliday's death. On the evidence of the Hefferan brothers, it is not even clear whether their mother was with Mr Halliday shortly before and at the time of the death.
Mr John Hefferan recalls that his mother telephoned him to give him the news of Mr Halliday's death. He does not know where she was speaking from or how long after the death he received the news. Nor does he know whether his mother was in Hyde or in Scotland at the time of the death. Having spoken to his brother, Mr Robert Hefferan, he understands that his mother was in Glasgow when she received a telephone call from Mr Halliday's neighbour, Mrs Joan King (who is now dead), to say that Mr Halliday was unwell. Mr John Hefferan understands from his brother that their mother went to Hyde and may have been present when Mr Halliday died.
Mr Robert Hefferan says that he assumed that his mother was present at the death but does not really know. His mother told him after the death that, during his final illness, Mr Halliday wanted a photograph of Mr Robert Hefferan's granddaughter taken down from the wall because she was staring at him. This suggested to Mr Robert Hefferan that Mr Halliday could not have been lucid towards the end of his life. However, for reasons which will shortly appear, I doubt that Mr Halliday had deteriorated to the extent suggested.
Although the witness evidence is unclear, there is a written account of events which comes from Shipman. The final entry in Mr Halliday's handwritten records reads as follows:
'30.3.87
V
(
visit
)
History of being ill from SAT (2/7)
Vague chest pain tingly (L) arm breathless
Sweaty felt faint
- looks ill pulse 60/- BP 90/?
basal creps.
D - probably C.T.
(
with
)
myocardial failure
given 10mg of morphine IV
Neighbour told ambulance rung
and cancelled
Patient died Approx 2.00
Self + next door neighbour present
Undertaker informed / Scotland rung
D.C.
(1) CT
(2) Chronic Bronchitis Emphysema
(3) Ca prostate'
.
This note is largely self-explanatory. It suggests that Shipman was called to see Mr Halliday and found that he had been ill for two days, that he was displaying signs of a heart attack when Shipman arrived and that Shipman diagnosed coronary thrombosis. Shipman claims to have given 10mg of intravenous morphine. A neighbour was informed and an ambulance was called but was then cancelled. Mr Halliday died at about 2pm in the presence of Shipman and the next door neighbour. If there was a neighbour involved, it may well have been Mrs King. The fact that it was necessary to ring Scotland would imply that Mrs Hefferan was not in Hyde at the time.
Mr Halliday's name appears in Shipman's visits book for the day of the death and a cross or crucifix sign appears alongside it, connoting death.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not survived but its counterfoil has been found. This was completed by Shipman on the day after the death. Shipman certified that the death was due to coronary thrombosis and that chronic bronchitis with emphysema and carcinoma of the prostate had both contributed to the death. Shipman said that he had last seen Mr Halliday alive on the day of his death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mr Halliday had died at
'1400 hrs'
. He said that he had attended Mr Halliday for one hour during his last illness. He had last seen Mr Halliday alive immediately prior to death. He said that he had seen Mr Halliday's body immediately after death and that he had performed a complete external examination. The cause of death was as stated on the MCCD counterfoil and the mode of death was said to be coma of
'About
hour'
. Shipman said that his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations. He said that no one had nursed Mr Halliday during his last illness. He recorded that he and a neighbour were present at the moment of death.
Mrs Hefferan was the applicant for cremation and signed Form A on 31st
March 1987.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Baker concluded that Mr Halliday's death was highly suspicious both on the basis of his consideration of the medical records and his separate consideration of the cremation forms. He commented:
'Sudden death in the afternoon, Shipman present...
It can happen, but the pattern is typical...
no attempt to resuscitate...
morphine iv (note, batch number not recorded)'
.
Conclusion
There are a number of suspicious circumstances surrounding this death. This was a sudden and unexpected death, which occurred in Shipman's presence. I say that it was sudden and unexpected for several reasons. First, Shipman's visits book does not suggest that Mr Halliday had been ill in the days before his death. This was Shipman's first visit for over two months. Second, if Mr Halliday had been unwell for some time, to the extent that his health was giving cause for concern, Mrs Hefferan would not have been in Scotland. She would have been looking after her brother in Hyde. I am satisfied from Shipman's medical note and from Form B, that Mrs Hefferan was not in Hyde at the time of the death. If she had been present, Shipman would not have telephoned Scotland. If she had been present at the death, Shipman would have said so. He was always anxious to say that others had been present at a death. He often said others were present when they were not. I have never come across a case in which Shipman has omitted to mention as present someone who was in fact there. Although Shipman's medical note suggests that Mr Halliday had been ill for two days when Shipman saw him on 30th
March, no reliance can be placed on that note. Shipman often fabricated medical notes so as to provide an explanation for a death he had caused. Shipman's notes do not suggest that the death was due to respiratory failure. He certified that the cause was coronary thrombosis, a common cause of sudden death and one which Shipman frequently relied on when he had killed a patient. If the death had followed the kind of gradual decline or a chest infection which are the usual precursors of death from respiratory failure, I would have expected Shipman to certify respiratory failure as the cause. The long-term medical history was such as would have led to the expectation of a death from respiratory failure. There was no clear history of heart disease such as would have led to the expectation of a cardiac death, although it is true that, as a heavy smoker, Mr Halliday must have been at some increased risk of heart attack. For those reasons, I deduce that Mr Halliday's final illness was very short, so short that Mrs Hefferan did not reach Hyde before the death.
The death occurred in Shipman's presence. That, in itself, is a factor which arouses real suspicion that Shipman caused the death. Dr John Grenville says that it is extremely unusual for a patient to die in the course of a home visit by a general practitioner, unless the patient was terminally ill or the doctor had been called out as an emergency on account of acute symptoms of a serious nature, such as might indicate a heart attack or stroke. This visit took place in the early afternoon, at a time when Shipman would usually be making his routine calls. It is possible that he was called out on account of acute and serious symptoms. However, I think this is very unlikely, as Mr Halliday's name appears in the list of Shipman's visits for that day without any indication that there had been an urgent request. If the request was not made as a matter of urgency, it was an extraordinary coincidence that Mr Halliday should have died during the visit. This kind of coincidence does not occur in the experience of other doctors. Shipman would have us believe that it happened frequently with him. I regard any death which occurred during a visit by Shipman as highly suspicious.
The note Shipman made of the consultation during which Mr Halliday died arouses further suspicion. It creates the impression that Mr Halliday was suffering from a heart attack. Shipman claims to have called an ambulance and to have cancelled it before arrival because Mr Halliday had already died. This is a pattern I have seen in many Shipman killings. In other cases, where it has been possible to verify that claim, it has almost always been found that Shipman had not called an ambulance. This death occurred so long ago that the ambulance records have long since been destroyed. However, I note that Shipman claimed on Form B that he had been with Mr Halliday for an hour before his death and that the death was preceded by a coma of 30 minutes. I find it hard to believe that the ambulance, if called, would not have arrived in that time. In any event, unconsciousness for a period of 30 minutes between a coronary thrombosis and death would be most unusual. The usual course of events, if the heart attack is to prove fatal, is for the patient to go into cardiac arrest and die within a few minutes. The attending doctor should call an ambulance as an emergency and then carry out cardiopulmonary resuscitation procedures until the paramedics arrive. Shipman did not do this. His medical note and Form B entries do not make good medical sense. I do not think Shipman ever called an ambulance. I regard this as a highly suspicious feature.
The medical note also refers to the presence of a neighbour at the death. That, too, is a feature which appears in many cases in which Shipman killed his patient. He liked to create the impression that he had not been alone with his patient throughout the death. In this case, I cannot say whether or not a neighbour was present, but Shipman's claims give rise to some suspicion.
Shipman claimed that he had administered 10mg morphine to Mr Halliday. A very small dose of morphine might be appropriate treatment if Mr Halliday were suffering extreme pain or distress during a heart attack or an attack of acute ventricular failure. However, such an injection must be given slowly and with great care, observing the effect on the patient, and the injection should be stopped as soon as the desired effect is achieved. For Mr Halliday, 10mg would have been a dangerously large dose, as his respiratory function was already compromised. Such a dose might, of itself, have caused Mr Halliday's death. However, the question arises as to whether Shipman gave more than 10mg. In any case where it is seen that Shipman's use of opiates is followed by death, great suspicion arises. Shipman did not have a controlled drugs register and should not have had opiates in his medical bag. It is known that, on many occasions, he had a sufficient quantity with him to kill his patient.
My conclusion is that Shipman killed Mr Halliday by administering to him a lethal injection of opiates. I am sure of this conclusion. I think that Mr Halliday had probably been in reasonable health in the days before his death. He probably felt unwell on the morning of 30th
March and either telephoned the surgery to ask for a visit or asked his neighbour to do so. When Shipman arrived, he found that Mrs Hefferan was not there, which was unusual, and took the opportunity to kill him.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001