The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Peter Higginbottom
Introduction
Mr Peter Higginbottom died at Tameside General Hospital on Friday, 19th
January 1996 at the age of 42. He was a bachelor and lived with his mother, Mrs Gladys Higginbottom, at 20 Silver Hill Road, Hyde. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. A hospital doctor, Dr F Negro, certified that the cause of Mr Higginbottom's death was brain stem cerebrovascular accident.
Although this was a death that occurred in hospital, the Inquiry decided to investigate it because Shipman had seen Mr Higginbottom very shortly before he was admitted to hospital. The Inquiry has had access to Mr Higginbottom's general practitioner, ambulance and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documentation for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
The medical notes and records indicate that Mr Higginbottom had learning difficulties. He underwent an operation in 1994 for varicose veins. He had had other minor illnesses that were treated appropriately.
In September 1995, according to the computerised medical records, Mr Higginbottom complained of diarrhoea. He suffered a recurrence of this complaint and was seen again on Monday, 8th
January 1996. Faecal samples were taken and were reported as normal on 12th
January. On 13th
January, medication was given for relief of diarrhoea.
On Tuesday, 16th
January, Shipman sent a referral letter to Miss Morrell's surgical clinic at Tameside General Hospital. This described an eight week history of looseness of stool and sought guidance on treatment.
The Circumstances Leading to Death
On Wednesday, 17th
January 1996, the practice visits book contains the following entry:
'Peter Higginbottom - FIRST VISIT.'
This cannot have been intended to mean that this was Mr Higginbottom's first visit to see Shipman, since plainly it was not. Dr Grenville has told the Inquiry that the note suggests that there was a degree of urgency expressed by the caller.
The handwritten medical records contain the following entry for that day:
'V.
(
visit
)
History of bleeding
rectally: Poor appetite
last night. bled rectally'
.
The corresponding entry in the computerised records says:
'O/E looks ill
admit tgh
(
Tameside General Hospital
)
'
.
Shipman wrote a referral letter in the following terms:
'Dear Dr,
About 10/7 he started with
diarrhoea and abdo pain. Treatment with
Imodium gave little relief (Stool
sample enclosed).
Today
37.8ºC. - Resp 22/min. BP 150/80.
pulse 124/min.
Conscious level responds to commands only
Resp
rate 22/min, little else.
CVS
150/80 124 /min.HS l II.
Abdo
(
diagram
)
tender kidney area.
CNS
only answers to command.
Sighing respiration, smells? uraemia
not
dehydrated.
Thanking you for taking him
Yrs HFS'
.
Although Shipman does not mention an ambulance, it would appear that one was called at about 1.17pm. The patient report form suggests that Shipman told the paramedics that Mr Higginbottom was in renal failure and that they gave oxygen. Mr Higginbottom's verbal response was incomprehensible and he gave no motor response. His respiratory rate was 34 per minute.
The hospital notes record that Mr Higginbottom was admitted to Tameside General Hospital on 17th
January. The history was that he had had diarrhoea for ten days. He had been found unresponsive in bed that morning. He had lost a lot of blood through the rectum. He did not recover consciousness and was pronounced dead at 4.30pm on 19th
January.
Within the notes and records there is also a letter, addressed to Shipman, from Dr E M Lee, registrar to Dr Chopra, at Tameside General Hospital. The letter states as follows:
'Re: Peter Higginbottom, 20 Silver Hill Road, Hyde (4.1.54)
Admitted:
Died:
DIAGNOSIS:
17.1.96
19.1.96
Brain Stem CVA. Infection. GI bleed.
This 42-year old man known to have learning difficulties was admitted unconscious with a glasgow coma scale of 4. He had been found unresponsive that morning and deteriorated. Pupils were myotic almost unresponsive to light. He had continuous hiccups, bilateral extensor planter
(
sic
)
responses and the whole of his body had grossly increased tones.
He appeared dehydrated. Pulse 120. Blood pressure 150/37. Respiratory rate 30. He was incontinent and passing blood per rectum. He was pyrexial and white count raised to 30 with over 90% neutrophils. He had a hypochromic microcytic mild anaemia of 11.7
He was treated with antibiotics, Ranitidine and fluids but continued to deteriorate until he died'
.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville has commented that the handwritten notes made by Shipman do not suggest that Mr Higginbottom was extremely ill. Nor do they mention that an ambulance was called. Both of these features are odd but, in the overall context of the case, and knowing how poor Shipman's standard of note taking was, they do not render the death suspicious. In Dr Grenville's view, the findings of the hospital doctors are indicative of a brain stem stroke, and the certified cause of death is consistent with the hospital findings. It is also consistent with the letter that Shipman wrote to the admitting hospital doctor on 17th
January 1996, and his computerised note dated 17th
January 1996.
The ambulance records indicate that, when the ambulance crew arrived at Mr Higginbottom's home, his respiratory rate was 34 per minute. Dr Grenville has noted that Shipman's referral letter records the respiratory rate as being 22 per minute and on arrival in hospital the respiratory rate was said to be 30 per minute. As Dr Grenville has observed, none of the three recorded respiratory rates is consistent with the after-effects of an opiate overdose. If such an overdose had been given, the respiratory rate would have been much lower, probably of the order of five to ten breaths per minute. Dr Grenville says that the medical evidence points to a natural death and there is no evidence that Shipman administered a lethal dose of opiates.
Conclusion
I am quite sure that Mr Higginbottom died of natural causes. The evidence shows that he was already unresponsive when Shipman's attendance was requested. Shipman's only contribution was to arrange for the patient to be admitted to hospital.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001