The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The First Report
>
Alphabetical List of Cases
>
Ruth Highley
Introduction
Mrs Ruth Highley died at her home, 5 Maitland Street, Walsden, Todmorden on Friday, 10th
May 1974 at the age of 72. She was registered as a patient at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Practice, Todmorden, where Shipman had been practising for less than two months at the time of her death. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was hypernephroma (cancer) of the left kidney.
Mrs Highley's death was the first of the 22 deaths for which the cause was certified by Shipman during his time in Todmorden. Following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's clinical audit in January 2001, the police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Marian Lever, Mrs Highley's niece.
No inquest was held at the time of Mrs Highley's death but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Lever and has obtained a report from Dr John Grenville. Apart from the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), no relevant contemporaneous documents have survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Highley lived with her husband, Mr Albert Highley, who has since died. About 18 months before her death, Mrs Highley was found to be suffering from cancer of the left kidney. She was treated at a hospital in Leeds. Her condition deteriorated and she was confined to bed for several weeks before her death. She was nursed by her husband and Mr and Mrs Lever.
Shipman visited Mrs Highley at home on a regular basis and, in her final days, he saw her every day. No one else would be present in the room during Shipman's consultations with her. Mrs Lever is aware that Shipman administered injections to her aunt. She does not know what they were, although she knew that they were to ease Mrs Highley's pain.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Lever remembers receiving the news of Mrs Highley's death by telephone. She went over to Maitland Street. She told the police that her uncle told her that Shipman had visited that day, although she could not remember whether her uncle had said that Shipman had visited 'before Ruth died or if he was there at the time of her death'. In her statement to the Inquiry, Mrs Lever states that she cannot say with certainty that Shipman saw her aunt before her death. She assumes that, because Shipman saw Mrs Highley every day before her death, he must have seen her on the day of her death. Mrs Highley says that her aunt's death came as a relief because she had suffered so much.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death. On it, he must have said when he last saw Mrs Highley alive. Unfortunately, neither that certificate nor its counterfoil has survived. Mrs Highley was cremated at Rochdale Crematorium but her cremation certificate has not survived. Only the death certificate remains, which records that Shipman certified the cause of death and that Mr Highley was present at the death.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville has examined the witness statements and the death certificate. He has noted that Shipman attended Mrs Highley regularly and that he probably gave her injections, possibly of opiates. However, as Dr Grenville observes, we do not know what he gave Mrs Highley or whether the dose was appropriate.
Conclusion
Mrs Highley had terminal cancer and was extremely unwell. She was suffering much pain and it is likely that Shipman visited her daily to give her pain-relieving drugs. There is no evidence to show whether Shipman saw Mrs Highley alive on the day of her death. We do not even know at what time of day Mrs Highley died. It may be that Shipman's only visit on that day was after the death. We do not know.
It is possible that Shipman visited Mrs Highley shortly before her death or was with her at the moment of death. It is possible that Shipman administered a lethal injection of opiate with the intention, not of relieving her pain, but of hastening her death. Bearing in mind that Shipman was to become a serial killer, that his known means of killing was to inject opiate and that many of his victims were in poor health, it is not fanciful to postulate that he might have killed Mrs Highley.
However, the fact that Mr Highley did not mention to Mrs Lever that there was a close temporal association between Shipman's visit, an injection and the death probably indicates that there was no such close association. I think it is unlikely that Shipman did anything unlawful that had the effect of causing or hastening Mrs Highley's death. I conclude therefore that the death was probably natural. I cannot, however, rule out the possibility of foul play.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001