The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Clifford Barnes Heapey
Introduction
Mr Clifford Barnes Heapey died at Godley Court, Hyde Nursing Home, Grange Road South, Hyde on Friday, 2nd
June 1995 at the age of 85. He was a widower, his wife having died in 1984. He had been a patient of Shipman since moving to Gee Cross in the late 1970s. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Heapey's death was coronary thrombosis due to congestive heart failure.
Professor Richard Baker classified Mr Heapey's death as moderately suspicious on the basis of both the cremation material and the contents of his medical records. Accordingly, the police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Heapey's son, Mr Brian Chapman Heapey, and from Mrs Sandra Berry, a nurse who worked at the nursing home at the relevant time. They also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Heapey but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Brian Heapey and his wife, as well as from Mrs Berry and from Mrs Sandra Fitzgerald, a care assistant employed at the nursing home. A further statement has been obtained from Dr Grenville. The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Heapey's general practitioner and hospital records, the visits book, duty doctor transfer book and appointments sheets and the other contemporaneous documentation referred to below. The Hyde Nursing Home notes are no longer available, apart from a Notification of Death form.
Mr and Mrs Brian Heapey and Mrs Berry gave evidence at a hearing on 6th
December 2001. Mrs Fitzgerald and Dr Grenville gave evidence on 7th
December 2001.
Personal Background
According to Mr Brian Heapey, his father suffered from senile dementia, anaemia and bowel problems that led to occasional faecal incontinence. He was compulsorily detained under the provisions of the Mental Health Act 1983 in late 1994 and thereafter lived permanently at Hyde Nursing Home. In October 1994, Shipman wrote a letter to the Adult Service Team at Tameside General Hospital outlining Mr Heapey's needs and this appears to have been instrumental in obtaining a place for him at the nursing home.
Mr Brian Heapey does not recall that his father had any heart problems. The members of staff at the nursing home do not remember Mr Heapey's specific health problems but they do remember that he was not as frail as some residents were.
The medical records suggest that Mr Heapey had congestive heart failure but Shipman's diagnosis of this condition must be treated with circumspection. Dr Grenville says that Shipman often diagnosed this condition on very little evidence. In Mr Heapey's handwritten general practitioner records, congestive heart failure and dementia are identified as important features in 1994. Innovace (which is enalapril, a treatment for heart conditions, including hypertension and congestive heart failure), bendrofluazide (a treatment for hypertension and heart failure) and Frusene (a diuretic) were prescribed in 1989 and 1990 but not again until 1994. The hospital notes, in particular a letter dated 22nd
November 1990, record that in 1990 it was possible to discharge Mr Heapey from the geriatric clinic because he was not in heart failure. There was no later referral to hospital.
The computerised records mention congestive heart failure on several occasions in 1995 but the entries do not record any signs or symptoms and should therefore be treated with caution. Between March and May 1995, Shipman increased Mr Heapey's dosage on four occasions. He did not record any signs or symptoms to justify the increases and Dr Grenville observed that it is possible that these entries were fabricated by Shipman in an attempt to make it appear that Mr Heapey was suffering from increasing cardiac failure.
Dr Grenville has examined an electrocardiogram (ECG) taken in 1990 and considers that the appearances suggest that Mr Heapey might have had a myocardial infarction at some time in the past and, if so, would be at increased risk of suffering a further heart attack. He does not think that there is any satisfactory evidence that Mr Heapey had congestive heart failure.
The Day of the Death
At about 9.30am on 2nd
June 1995, Mr Heapey was visited by his son. He was being shaved and did not appear unwell.
Later that morning, one of Mr Heapey's carers asked Mrs Berry to look in on him because she was not happy with his condition. Mrs Berry did so and she found him to be unwell. He was pale, clammy and complained of back pain. She put him to bed and called Shipman out.
Shipman's visits book records against Mr Heapey's name and address the following words:
'not very well 38 temp
vomitted
(
sic
)
- phlegm'
.
Mrs Berry said that she was sure that Mr Heapey's pain was in the back and not in his chest. She did not think Mr Heapey was having a heart attack. If she had thought that he was, she would have called an ambulance. Mrs Berry kept an eye on Mr Heapey and he was not well enough to have any lunch.
Shipman arrived at about lunchtime and was greeted by Mrs Fitzgerald, who arranged for Mrs Berry to be with Shipman when he saw Mr Heapey. Shipman said that Mr Heapey had suffered a heart attack. He went out to his car and returned with a syringe and phial. He told Mr Heapey that he was going to give him an injection and Mr Heapey appeared to understand. Mrs Berry presumed and Shipman confirmed that the injection was a diuretic. He then administered an injection intravenously into Mr Heapey's arm, whereupon Mr Heapey died instantly. Shipman said that he would be able to certify the cause of death and made a rather flippant remark to the effect that Mrs Berry should make sure that none of her other patients passed away. He gave no explanation as to what had happened. No member of staff was present apart from Mrs Berry herself.
Although his patient had died in his presence, Shipman made no handwritten entry in Mr Heapey's medical records. Brief entries in the computerised records read:
'Seen in own home'
'O/E - dead
14.10hrs ct
(
coronary thrombosis
)
chf dementia'
.
Mr Brian Heapey learned of his father's death some time after 2.30pm. He immediately attended the nursing home and was told that Shipman had been with his father when he died.
The Aftermath
About two days after his father's death, Mr Brian Heapey attended Shipman's surgery to collect the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). In his statement to the Inquiry, Mr Brian Heapey said that he recalled that Shipman said words to the following effect:
'Sorry about your dad. When I got there he was in a right state. There was shit everywhere. They'd just cleaned him up. He was in a right state thrashing around. I could have revived him but I thought I'd let him go. He would have been a vegetable, it was not worth it'
.
When he came to give oral evidence, Mr Brian Heapey did not repeat these words but said that this is what Shipman had said. He said he found the language coarse and vulgar.
Shipman certified on the MCCD that Mr Heapey's coronary thrombosis commenced 20 minutes before his death and that, for three years before then, he had suffered from congestive heart failure. He had last seen him alive on the day of his death.
Shipman subsequently completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that death had occurred at 2.10pm on 2nd
June 1995. He said that he attended Mr Heapey during his last illness for 20 minutes and that he last saw Mr Heapey alive immediately before death. He saw the body immediately after death and made a complete external examination. Shipman identified the immediate cause of death to be coronary thrombosis due to congestive heart failure and contributed to by senile dementia. He stated that the mode of death was collapse of
'minutes only'
duration. He stated that his responses to the questions relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations as well as statements made by members of staff at the home. Shipman stated that
'self + 2 of staff at the home'
were present at the time of death.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville said that it was not possible to be certain about the seriousness of Mr Heapey's condition in the late morning of the day of the death. That he was pale, clammy and suffering from back pain might indicate that he was suffering angina or having a heart attack. However, the note recorded in the visits book did not suggest that the situation was urgent. The raised temperature and vomiting of phlegm might well suggest that Mr Heapey was developing a chest infection. The back pain might have been related to earlier complaints of back pain connected with Mr Heapey's increasing immobility.
If, when Shipman arrived, he found Mr Heapey in acute heart failure, it would have been appropriate to give him an intravenous injection of a strong diuretic. This injection should be given slowly. It would not create any risk of immediate death. Only if Mr Heapey were at the point of death could his sudden death 'on the end of the needle' be explained. As the evidence was that Mr Heapey did not appear to Mrs Berry to be at the point of death, it seems highly suspicious that Mr Heapey should die so suddenly as the injection was given. Dr Grenville could not be certain that Mr Heapey's condition was not critical before Shipman's arrival but he thought it likely that Shipman had administered a lethal dose of opiate to Mr Heapey.
Professor Baker considered Mr Heapey's death to be moderately suspicious on the basis of both the cremation material and the contents of the medical records.
Conclusion
There are some features of this death which are very suspicious. The first and most obvious is that the death occurred in Shipman's presence and immediately after he had administered an injection to Mr Heapey. It appears that he told Mrs Berry that the injection was of a diuretic but he did not record the fact that he had given an injection in the medical notes.
It is not possible to be certain of Mr Heapey's medical condition at the time of Shipman's arrival. It is clear that he was sufficiently unwell to need a visit from the doctor and it is possible that he was critically ill. However, I think that the nursing home staff would have recognised if Mr Heapey was seriously ill and would have conveyed a sense of urgency to the surgery staff, who would have reflected that urgency in their note in the visits book. Moreover, had the nursing home staff realised that Mr Heapey might possibly die, they would have summoned his son. Accordingly, I think it unlikely that Mr Heapey was critical at the time Shipman was summoned. There is no evidence of deterioration between the telephone call and Shipman's arrival, although I cannot rule that out. In my view, it seems likely that, at the time of Shipman's arrival, Mr Heapey was quite unwell but not in a critical state. That he should die immediately after the injection which Shipman then gave makes me think that it is highly likely that the injection Shipman gave was an opiate and that, by injecting him, Shipman intended to bring about Mr Heapey's death. I cannot say that I am sure of this conclusion but I think it highly likely that Shipman killed Mr Heapey.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001