The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Muriel Eveline Harrison
Introduction
Miss Muriel Eveline Harrison died at Hyde Nursing Home, Grange Road South, Hyde on Monday, 2nd
February 1998 at the age of 73. She had been a patient of Shipman since moving to Hyde Nursing Home in October 1996. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
In August 1998, the Greater Manchester Police investigated Miss Harrison's death as one of those certified by Shipman in the twelve month period before the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy. The police took statements from Margaret Fletcher Lister (Miss Harrison's cousin), Dr Alan Banks (the Assistant Director of Primary Care for West Pennine Health Authority), Dr Jeremy Michael Dirckze (the doctor who completed cremation Form C) and Detective Sergeant John Ashley, who had examined the Market Street Surgery computer.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Miss Harrison but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Ms Sheila Ann Fraser, Ms Caroline Fleming Lowe and Ms Yvonne Greer (all nurses working at Hyde Nursing Home at the time of Miss Harrison's death) and Mr John Berry (a care assistant at the nursing home). The Inquiry has also had access to Miss Harrison's general practitioner and hospital records, the surgery appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for 1998 and the Hyde Nursing Home records, as well as to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Harrison was born mute and suffered from epilepsy. From a young age she was a patient in a psychiatric hospital. As she got older, she became partially deaf and almost completely blind. She was admitted to Hyde Nursing Home on 7th
October 1996. Mr Berry says that despite her disabilities, Miss Harrison was not physically frail and was very pleasant.
The Days Leading up to Death
Miss Harrison fell and injured her nose on 28th
January 1998. Ms Lowe made the following entry in the daily evaluation notes:
'9.15 Muriel fell onto the floor and hit her
nose, while attending to her hygiene and
dressing needs, nose bloody
bruising
evident on her nose and left shoulder.
Emergency ambulance informed advised to call casualty
contacted casualty advised to phoned
(
sic
)
her g.p. to come and visit Muriel today.
Nose appears dislocated and bruising
.
Accident book completed. Family
contacted and informed of fall'
.
It is clear that Shipman visited that day. There are entries in the handwritten and computerised general practitioner records. The record kept by the nursing home suggests that Shipman straightened Miss Harrison's nose.
Shipman visited Miss Harrison again on 30th
January 1998. An entry in the visits book, which appears to have been made by a surgery receptionist on receipt of the request for a visit, says that Miss Harrison was
'FLOPPY. NOT EATING/NO
(
sic
)
SAYING MUCH'
. A form kept by the nursing home, specifically designed to note all doctors' visits, records that Shipman was called out because of Miss Harrison's
'floppiness'
. Her breathing was found to be laboured but there is a note
'nil ordered'
which signifies that no treatment was given.
The Day of the Death
Mr Berry recalls that Miss Harrison had breakfast as usual on the morning of her death. The final entry in the care assistants' notes reads:
'UP 9.30 AM took weetabix
coffee. No lunch taken.
Muriel is just holding food and drink in her mouth. She is
not attempting to chew or swallow'
.
The Market Street Surgery visits book for 2nd
February 1998 records:
'Had fall days/no better'
.
Mr Berry recalls that it was following his attempts to give Miss Harrison some lunch that Shipman was contacted. He thinks that that would have been around 12.30pm or 1pm. At the time, he and Ms Lowe thought that Miss Harrison might have suffered an extension to a stroke; they took her back to her room. Shipman probably arrived quite promptly and probably saw Miss Harrison between 1pm and 2pm. Upon entering Miss Harrison's room, he said 'Is this a possible or a probable? I have had two possibles this morning'. He apparently went on to say that Miss Harrison was 'a possible' and that she was in a coma. Ms Lowe asked Shipman how long Miss Harrison had to live and he said 'a couple of hours' and that her relatives should be contacted. Mr Berry says that Shipman did not administer any medication during the course of the visit and that both he and Ms Lowe were present throughout. I do not understand Shipman's strange comment about 'possibles'. However, it may be that he was referring to patients who were to die on that day. Shipman killed Mrs Cissie Davies on 2nd
February 1998.
The entry in the computerised medical records relating to Shipman's visit reads:
'cva unspecified
very deeply unconcious
(
sic
)
'
.
Ms Lowe does not recall being present during Shipman's visit, although she does remember being told by another member of staff, when starting her shift at 2.30pm, that Shipman had visited. She remembers going to see Miss Harrison and noting that her breathing was laboured and her skin was mottled. She says that Miss Harrison appeared to be 'shutting down'. She was not responsive to physical stimuli or the spoken word.
Mr Berry remembers that around 3pm, he looked in on Miss Harrison and saw that she was bleeding heavily from the nose and mouth. As he and Ms Lowe were cleaning her face, the bleeding stopped and Miss Harrison died.
Although Ms Lowe remembers the nosebleed, she does not remember anything further about the circumstances of Miss Harrison's death and does not think that she was present at the moment of death.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD and certified that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident. He stated that the approximate interval between the onset of the stroke and death was four hours. He certified that epilepsy, from which he said Miss Harrison had suffered for 70 years, had contributed to the death. Shipman said that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination. The MCCD is dated 2nd February 1998.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He said that Miss Harrison died at 4.30pm and that he had attended her for three days during her last illness. He said that he had last seen Miss Harrison alive about one hour before death and had seen her body about two hours after death. The causes of death were stated as on the MCCD. The mode of death was said to be coma lasting four hours. He said that these answers were based on his own observations and statements made by staff at the home. Shipman claimed that the sister on duty was present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered Miss Harrison's medical records and her cremation documents. On the basis of the medical records, he thought the death was moderately suspicious but the cremation documents did not arouse any suspicion. He commented:
'There is no history of a new cva prior to death, of deterioration of epilepsy; she had a fracture (nose) a few days before - the case should have been discussed with the coroner'
.
Professor Baker did not, of course, have the benefit of any witness evidence. However, in the light of Miss Harrison's recent fall, Shipman should have referred the case to the coroner.
Conclusion
I am satisfied that Shipman did not cause or contribute to Miss Harrison's death.
Miss Harrison suffered a bad fall a few days before her death. Her condition deteriorated from that time. She was seen to be unresponsive at lunchtime on the day of her death. Shipman was called but did not give any treatment. He plainly thought that Miss Harrison was dying. After he had gone, Miss Harrison seems to have had some sort of haemorrhage immediately before her death.
Although it is clear that Shipman saw Miss Harrison only about an hour or so before her death, the evidence is that he did not give any treatment and certainly did not give an injection. The way in which Miss Harrison died, following a haemorrhage, is not suggestive of a death due to opiate poisoning.
It appears to me that Miss Harrison's death was neither sudden nor unexpected. There is no reason to suspect that Shipman did anything which caused or hastened the death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001