The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Violet Hadfield
Introduction
Mrs Violet Hadfield died at her home, 5 Gloucester Road, Hyde on Friday, 24th
May 1985 at the age of 74. It is not known whether she was registered as a patient of Shipman or one of the other doctors at the Donneybrook practice. However, Shipman certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed advertisements in a number of newspapers, seeking information about a number of deaths for which Shipman had certified the cause. Mrs Hadfield's name appeared in the published list but the Inquiry did not receive a response in relation to her death. However, the Inquiry was able to trace Mr Bernard Chronnell, who was the informant who registered Mrs Hadfield's death. Mr Chronnell was not related to Mrs Hadfield but it appears that he knew her because, as a member of the St Vincent de Paul Society, he visited elderly persons' homes. Mrs Hadfield was resident at Charnley House, Hyde, for some time before her death and it would appear that Mr Chronnell must have visited her there. However, he has no recollection of visiting her or of acting as the informant following her death.
The Inquiry has had access to the Charnley House admissions register and the daily diary for 1985. Shipman's visits book for that year has been found. Mrs Hadfield's medical records have not survived and no witness evidence is available to the Inquiry. The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD).
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
It would appear that Mrs Hadfield was probably a widow at the time of her death. The Charnley House admissions register shows that she was admitted on 29th
April 1985 and discharged on 12th
May 1985. The 'next of kin' entry has been left blank. From that, I infer that she probably had no surviving children or siblings.
The reason for Mrs Hadfield's stay at Charnley House is unknown. According to the diaries, Mrs Hadfield did not settle for a number of days on arrival and experienced some difficulty in sleeping. She did not appear to require any medical treatment save that she was given a laxative on three occasions, apparently to good effect. Overall, her stay at Charnley House appears to have been uneventful and the diaries record that she had a good last night at the home on 11th
May. She was discharged home at 2.30pm on Sunday, 12th
May 1985.
Mrs Hadfield's name appears in Shipman's visits book for Friday, 17th
May, Saturday, 18th
May, Monday, 20th
May and Tuesday, 21st
May. As is usual, the visits book does not contain any indication of the nature of the condition for which the doctor's attendance was required.
The Day of the Death
The only information about Friday, 24th
May 1985 comes from the visits book and the counterfoil to the MCCD, which Shipman must have completed. The certificate itself has not survived. The counterfoil records that Shipman last saw Mrs Hadfield alive on the day of her death. He stated that he had seen the body after death and there would be no post-mortem examination. The cause of death is certified as coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. Diabetes and asthma were said to have contributed to death but were not related to the coronary thrombosis.
Although Shipman recorded that he had seen Mrs Hadfield alive on the day of her death, her name does not appear in his visits book for Friday, 24th
May.
Conclusion
It is not possible to reach any conclusion about the cause of Mrs Hadfield's death or to form any view about whether or not Shipman was unlawfully involved.
There is very little evidence as to Mrs Hadfield's state of health at the time of her death. The reason for her fortnight's stay at Charnley House is unknown. It is possible that she was convalescing after a spell in hospital. Another possibility is that Mrs Hadfield was at Charnley House to give her usual carers two weeks' respite. However, as it does not appear that Mrs Hadfield had any relatives, this seems unlikely.
Although it appears that Mrs Hadfield was in reasonable health when she left Charnley House on Sunday, 12th
May, 12 days before she died, it seems that her health soon declined. On the basis of Shipman's visits book, he visited her on at least four occasions between her return home and the day of her death. It would seem likely that she developed quite a serious illness and he was visiting her periodically to monitor her condition.
In many cases considered by the Inquiry, suspicion has arisen because Shipman has been present at the death or has visited the deceased on the day of the death. If the deceased had not been seen alive after his visit, a high degree of suspicion would arise. There is some cause for suspicion in this case because Shipman recorded on the MCCD counterfoil that he had last seen Mrs Hadfield alive on the day of her death. However, it is not known whether she was seen alive after his departure.
The Inquiry has seen many cases in which Shipman has killed a patient and has attributed the death to a coronary thrombosis. This was one of the most common reasons he would give for a death which he himself had caused. This factor, when considered with the evidence that Shipman saw Mrs Hadfield on the day of death, raises a small element of suspicion in my mind that he might have killed her. However, the paucity of other evidence is such that I cannot reach any conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001