The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Caroline Veronica Hammond
Introduction
Mrs Caroline Veronica Hammond died at her home, Flat 41 Chartist House, Mount Street, Hyde on Sunday, 18th
January 1981 at the age of 70. Although it is not clear whether or not she was registered as a patient of Shipman or of one of the other Donneybrook doctors, it was Shipman who certified the cause of her death, saying that it was due to bronchopneumonia.
In August 2001, Mrs Dorene Veronica Fowden, Mrs Hammond's daughter, contacted the Inquiry to express concern about her mother's death. There has been no inquest into the death.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Fowden and has spoken to Mrs Hammond's other daughter, Mrs Katherine Cross, although her account does not add anything of substance to that of Mrs Fowden. Mrs Jennifer Unsworth, the resident warden at Chartist House at the time of the death, has told the Inquiry that she is unable to recall the circumstances of the death. Dr William Bennett and Dr Geoffrey Roberts, who practised from the Donneybrook Surgery, do not remember Mrs Hammond. The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1981.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Hammond was a widow and lived alone at Chartist House for the last four years of her life. Initially, she lived in a flat on the ninth floor, which was not warden controlled, but about two years before she died, she moved to a flat on a lower floor and had the benefit of warden supervision. Mrs Fowden says that her mother was in good health, save that she had severe arthritis in her legs. She had had a knee replacement operation shortly before moving to Chartist House but her mobility remained restricted. Mrs Fowden worked full time but she used to call on her mother every evening during the week. Mrs Hammond was a very sociable woman and did not like living alone. She would sometimes 'cry wolf' and say that she was ill in the hope that her daughter would spend more time with her. Mr and Mrs Fowden used to take Mrs Hammond out at weekends, either for a trip in the car or to their home for lunch.
Mrs Fowden does not believe that her mother was ever registered with Shipman and does not think that Shipman ever visited her. She thinks that Mrs Hammond would have liked to be on his list because she believed he was a good doctor. She thinks that if Shipman had ever visited her, her mother would have mentioned it to her.
The Days before the Death
On Friday, 16th
January 1981, two days before she died, Mrs Hammond visited a consultant orthopaedic surgeon at Tameside General Hospital, which at the time was called Ashton Hospital. This was a routine appointment in connection with her knee replacement. Mrs Fowden saw her mother that evening and although her mother was annoyed that she had had to go to the hospital alone, she was well and her condition did not give Mrs Fowden any cause for concern.
Shortly after 10.30am on Saturday, 17th
January 1981, Mrs Fowden received a message from Mrs Unsworth at Chartist House to say that Mrs Hammond was unwell and the doctor had been called. Mrs Fowden went to see her mother, who was in bed. At about midday, a doctor arrived. Mrs Fowden is sure that this was Dr Bennett. It is possible that she is mistaken, as Mrs Hammond's name appears in Shipman's visits book for that day. Mrs Fowden cannot remember the nature of her mother's illness but she recalls that the doctor advised that her mother should remain in bed. Mrs Fowden told him that, if her mother were to be bed bound, it would be difficult for the family to care for her, as both she and her sister worked full time. The doctor said that if Mrs Hammond were no better by the Monday, he would see about having her admitted to hospital. Mrs Fowden does not remember what treatment, if any, was provided that day.
After the doctor had gone, Mrs Fowden went home but returned to her mother's flat at about 6.30pm. During the next two hours, it seems that Mrs Hammond became confused. Mrs Fowden recalls that she was rambling, 'saying daft things and hallucinating'. Mrs Fowden wondered whether her mother was 'crying wolf' again, as she wanted her daughter to stay at the flat. Mrs Fowden left at about 8.30pm and went home.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Fowden returned to her mother's flat at about 7.30am the following day, Sunday, 18th
January. She went early, as she was concerned about her mother's condition. The front door was fitted with a Yale lock only and the door was locked when she arrived. Mrs Fowden called out to her mother but there was no reply. She peeped around the door and saw that her mother was sitting at the side of her bed. She looked as though she had gone to sit down and then fallen backwards. She was wearing pyjamas. Mrs Fowden went to find Mrs Unsworth, who came up to the flat and confirmed that Mrs Hammond was dead. Mrs Unsworth said that Mrs Hammond felt cold to the touch and must have been dead for some time. Mrs Unsworth telephoned for a doctor and at 10.30am an emergency doctor, presumably sent by the deputising service, arrived at the flat and certified the fact of death.
The Aftermath
On Monday, 19th
January 1981, Mrs Fowden called at the Donneybrook Surgery and explained to the receptionist that her mother had died on the previous day. She was told that Shipman was available and that he would sign the death certificate. Shipman certified that the cause of death was bronchopneumonia. At the time, Mrs Fowden questioned the certified cause of death, as she wondered whether her mother had had cancer. Shipman said that if she wished, there could be a post-mortem examination. Mrs Fowden did not want that.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not been recovered but its counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. At the top of the counterfoil, Shipman has written:
'Dr Roberts'
. He has given the date of death as
'18.1.81'
and the place of death as 41 Chartist House. The MCCD requires the certifying doctor to say when he or she last saw the deceased alive. The counterfoil has a section marked
'Last seen alive'
. Here Shipman has written
'17.1.81'
. By implication he was saying that he himself had seen Mrs Hammond on the day before her death. Shipman also stated that another medical practitioner had seen the body after death but that he, himself, had not. He said that there would not be a post-mortem examination, although there seems to have been some uncertainty about this resulting in an alteration. This may reflect the discussion that Mrs Fowden recalls. Shipman said that the cause of death was bronchopneumonia and that generalised osteoarthritis had contributed to the death but was not related to the cause.
Conclusion
There is no evidence from which I could conclude that Shipman was unlawfully involved in Mrs Hammond's death. There are some uncertainties, which is not surprising, given the passage of time, but nothing that arouses real suspicion.
Mrs Hammond was clearly very unwell at midday on Saturday, 17th
January. The doctor who visited had contemplated admitting her to hospital if her condition had not improved by the Monday. However, he did not seem to think it necessary to admit her that day. However, by the evening, Mrs Hammond was hallucinating and, at least with the benefit of hindsight, one can say that she must have been very ill. Her death during the night was certainly a shock to Mrs Fowden but, if she was very ill in the evening, her death during the night does not seem entirely surprising. This gradual progression through confusion to death is not typical of or consistent with death due to opiate poisoning. In short, this sounds like a natural death and not a Shipman killing.
There is no direct evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Hammond on 17th
January, except that he seems to have claimed to have done so when he completed the MCCD. Also Mrs Hammond's name appears in his visits book for that day. There are a number of possibilities. First, Mrs Fowden might be mistaken when she says it was Dr Bennett who visited at midday. It might have been Shipman. Second, Shipman might have visited in the afternoon at the request of the doctor who visited at midday. Mrs Unsworth could have let him in. This is unlikely as Shipman's calendar suggests that he was not on duty that weekend. If he did visit in the afternoon, he did not kill Mrs Hammond, as she was still alive in the evening, when her daughter visited. Third, it is possible that Shipman did not visit Mrs Hammond at all but completed the MCCD on behalf of one of the other doctors, either Dr Roberts or Dr Bennett, who might have been unavailable on the Monday. It may be that on the certificate itself, he explained that he was completing the form on behalf of a colleague. It may be that he bent the rules and completed it as if he had seen Mrs Hammond himself when he had not. These uncertainties cannot be resolved. However, none of these possibilities gives rise to any serious suspicion that Shipman killed Mrs Hammond.
I am sure that Mrs Hammond died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001