The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Jane Hett
Introduction
Mrs Mary Jane Hett died at her home, 32a Harbour Farm Road, Hyde during the night of Tuesday, 21st
November to Wednesday, 22nd
November 1978 at the age of 78. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in October 1977, a little over 12 months before her death. She thought highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia.
In September 2001, the Inquiry advertised for further information relating to a list of cases about which very little was known. In response, Mrs B Wrigley, Mrs Hett's granddaughter, contacted the Inquiry and provided the name and address of her father, Mr Barrie Hett, Mrs Hett's son. The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Hett. Mrs Hett's medical records have not survived and the available documentary records from the Donneybrook Surgery do not go back as far as 1978.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Hett lived with her husband, Mr Walter Hett. She had worked for many years in a cotton mill and suffered from bronchitis or possibly from byssinosis as the result of exposure to cotton dust. She ran her house with some assistance from a home help. Mrs Hett needed help with shopping, as she became breathless if she tried to carry anything heavy. She liked company and she and her husband would have lunch twice a week at Pensioners' House. Occasionally they would go out for a drink in the evening. Mr Barrie Hett and his wife lived nearby and Mr Hett would visit his parents once or twice a week.
Mr Barrie Hett does not recall that Shipman visited his mother at home. If she needed anything, she would go to the surgery. Mrs Hett did not mention her health very much and did not always tell her son if she had been to the surgery.
Mr Hett last saw his mother alive two or three days before her death. She was sitting in the lounge and appeared to Mr Hett to be her usual self. She did not mention that she was feeling unwell.
The Day of the Death
At 7am on the morning of the death, Mr Walter Hett arrived at Mr Barrie Hett's house and told him that his mother had died. He said that, when he awoke that morning, he found that she had died in the night. He did not mention a doctor having visited her the night before.
At about 9am, Mr Barrie Hett telephoned Shipman, who arrived at his parents' flat later that morning. He examined the body with a stethoscope and certified the fact of death. Mr Barrie Hett recalls that Shipman said that the cause of death was bronchitis.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not been recovered but its counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman recorded that he last saw Mrs Hett alive on 21st
November. It is recorded that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that Shipman had seen the body after death. He gave the cause of death as bronchopneumonia and said that chronic bronchitis and emphysema had contributed to the death but were not directly related to the main cause of death.
Conclusion
It appears to me that Mrs Hett must have died a natural death. She had a history of chronic bronchitis and breathing difficulties, which would have made her more susceptible to bronchopneumonia. Although she was noted to be well by her son two to three days before she died, we know from the generic evidence of Dr John Grenville that the period between the onset of bronchopneumonia and death can be as little as a few hours.
It is recorded on the MCCD counterfoil that Shipman saw Mrs Hett on the day before her death. Mr Walter Hett did not mention Shipman's visit to his son. It is unclear whether Shipman did in fact visit but, if he did, then Mr Hett obviously did not associate his wife's death with that visit.
Even if Shipman had visited Mrs Hett, the possibility that he gave her a lethal injection of opiates can be discounted. Professor Henry McQuay and Dr Grenville have given joint generic evidence to the Inquiry as to the timing and effect of opiates. If a lethal injection of opiates is administered intravenously, death follows within minutes. If administered intramuscularly, a lethal injection of opiates causes death within about an hour. Mr Walter Hett found his wife dead when he awoke on the morning of 22nd
November and told his son that she had died during the night. She must have been alive when he went to bed on the evening of 21st
November. I am satisfied that Shipman played no part in bringing about Mrs Hett's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001