The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Harriet Harris
Introduction
Mrs Harriet Harris died at her home, 12 South View, Woodley, Hyde on Monday, 22nd
January 1979 at the age of 77. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In August 2001, the Inquiry wrote to Mr Colin Harris, Mrs Harris' son, who was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'). Mr Harris subsequently telephoned the Inquiry and expressed concern about the circumstances of his mother's death.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Harris and received a letter from Mrs Nancy Mary Tigwell, Mrs Harris' daughter. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1979 and the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Mrs Harris' medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Harris was a widow and lived with her son, Mr Harris. She suffered from poor eyesight and a hiatus hernia. About five years before she died, Mrs Harris developed angina for which she took medication. She could not walk long distances and was breathless on climbing the stairs at home. She was small and slight and had plenty of energy. She enjoyed shopping with her son. Despite her physical complaints, Mrs Harris was mentally alert and remained largely independent. She enjoyed visiting stately homes.
The Events Leading up to Death
In January 1979, Mrs Harris spent about two weeks with Mrs Tigwell, who lived in Hertfordshire. Mrs Harris' name appears in Shipman's visits book for 8th
January. However, Mrs Tigwell says that her mother was with her on that day. It is possible that Shipman intended to visit Mrs Harris but found her not at home. At some stage during her visit to Hertfordshire, Mrs Harris spoke to her son by telephone and told him that she was not feeling well. During the second week of her stay, she saw a doctor, who thought that there was nothing seriously wrong with her. It appears that he said she was 'fine'.
Mrs Harris travelled back to Manchester by train on Sunday, 21st
January. It was a very cold day and there was ice on the roads, so Mr Harris arranged for his mother to be taken from the train to his car in a wheelchair. Mrs Harris appeared to be very tired after her journey. She ate a good evening meal and drank her usual nightcap of milk and honey. Mr Harris formed the impression that his mother's illness had been an emotional reaction to being away from home.
The Day of the Death
On 22nd
January, Mr Harris took his mother's breakfast to her in bed, as he often did. She said that she was not going to get up and, although Mr Harris suspected that his mother was just very tired from the journey, he asked Shipman to visit to make sure that his mother was not otherwise unwell. Mrs Harris' name appears in Shipman's visits book on the day of her death.
Shipman arrived at the house between 1pm and 2pm. When Mr Harris opened the door, Shipman brushed past him and went upstairs to see Mrs Harris. Mr Harris followed Shipman and, when halfway up the stairs, Shipman turned to him and said:
'There's no need for you to come in. Your mother is my patient'
. He walked into Mrs Harris' bedroom and shut the door in Mr Harris' face. Five minutes later, Shipman came downstairs and said:
'You're quite right. She is overtired from the journey. Don't allow her to stay in bed. It's not good for old people to lie in bed'
. Mr Harris went upstairs to speak to his mother and recalls that she was conscious but drowsy. She did not mention that she had been given an injection. Over the course of the next two hours, Mr Harris called in to see his mother on two occasions and tried to persuade her to get up. She did not want to get out of bed and seemed only to want to talk about her grandson. However, in due course, Mr Harris heard his mother moving about and, at about 3.45pm, she appeared downstairs, fully dressed. She sat down and chatted to her son. She still seemed very tired but was quite able to hold a conversation.
At about 4.45pm, Mrs Harris was sitting in a rocking chair by the fire with Mr Harris. She reminded him that 'Blue Peter' was about to start on television. Mr Harris was switching the television on when his mother made a 'funny grunt' and slumped down in her chair. Mr Harris knelt at her feet and tried to rouse her, to no avail. He then banged on the neighbouring wall until a neighbour came to the house, lifted Mrs Harris from the rocking chair and laid her on the floor. Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry, has confirmed that this was the appropriate thing to do. Shipman was called. He arrived within an hour and confirmed that Mrs Harris had died.
Certification
The MCCD has not been recovered; however, the counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman said that he had last seen Mrs Harris alive on 8th
January 1979. In view of the information provided by Mrs Tigwell, this would seem to be wrong. Shipman said that there would be no post-mortem examination and that he had seen the body after death. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 23rd
January 1979.
Other Matters
Mr Harris recalls that, when Shipman came to the house to certify the death, he removed Mrs Harris' wedding ring and gave it to Mr Harris. Shipman said that it should not be left on her hand as it might be stolen. As Mr Harris put the ring in a leather pouch in Mrs Harris' jewellery box, he noticed that its edges seemed sharp and not smooth, as they would be if the ring had been worn for many years. He thought that the ring was not his mother's wedding ring and he suspected that Shipman had taken the real ring. He recalls that, when he gave the ring to his sister several years later, she asked whether their mother had ever pawned her wedding ring. Mr Harris thinks that his mother would never have needed to do such a thing.
Conclusion
Mrs Harris had suffered from angina for a number of years before she died and was, therefore, at significant risk of suffering a heart attack. She was unwell in the weeks before she died, although the nature of her illness is not known. There must have been some reason for her to see a doctor while in Hertfordshire. She was very tired on her return home.
On the day of her death, Mrs Harris was still tired and reluctant to get up. Shipman visited at about lunchtime and was alone with her. However, there is no reason to think that he gave her any drug which might have caused or precipitated her death. Certainly there is no reason to think that he gave her a lethal injection of opiate. Had he done so, she would have fallen deeply asleep and died long before she got up, dressed and came downstairs. Dr John Grenville and Professor Henry McQuay, in their evidence to the Inquiry, have explained the timing and effect of opiates. A lethal dose of opiate given intravenously will cause death within a few minutes. If given intramuscularly, a lethal dose will cause death within about an hour. That Mrs Harris remained alive and conscious for at least two hours after Shipman's visit shows that he cannot have killed her by injection of opiate. From the description given by Mr Harris of the manner of her death, it sounds as though Mrs Harris had a sudden, fatal heart attack. The medical advisor to the Inquiry has advised me that he knows of no drug which Shipman could have administered which could have induced a heart attack two or three hours later.
There are two unusual features about the case. The first is that Shipman claimed that he last saw Mrs Harris alive on 8th
January 1979, when the witness evidence and Shipman's visits book suggest that he saw her alive on the day of her death. It is possible that this was a deliberate attempt to conceal from the registrar that he had seen Mrs Harris alive on the day of her death. That is unlikely because the circumstances in which he did so would have been readily capable of confirmation by Mr Harris and would not have excited any suspicion.
Second, Mr Harris believes that Shipman took his mother's wedding ring after her death. As this was not investigated at the time, I could not be confident that Mr Harris' recollection is correct.
Neither of these unusual features gives rise to any suspicion that Shipman caused Mrs Harris' death. I am quite sure that Mrs Harris died a natural death and I hope that this decision will serve to put her relatives' minds at ease.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001