The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Christina Harrison
Introduction
Mrs Christina Harrison died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Sunday, 17th
September 1978 at the age of 96. It is not known whether, or for how long, she had been a patient of Shipman, but by the time of her death he had been in practice in Hyde for almost 12 months. He certified that the cause of her death was senility.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Peter Fallon, Mrs Harrison's grandson, and has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the Charnley House daily diary and admissions register. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Fallon says that for many years Mrs Harrison lived with his parents at their home in Haughton Green, Manchester. She was physically robust and had a strong personality. When she was in her eighties, she had two operations to remove malignant growths. She also had a knee operation, after which she became rather immobile and needed a wheelchair when outdoors. She could no longer do any household chores and as time went by, Mr Fallon's mother found it difficult to look after her. In the spring of 1978, Mrs Harrison had a fall and spent some time in Tameside General Hospital. She was discharged to a residential home in Dukinfield but she was not happy and did not settle. She was admitted to Charnley House on 5th
July 1978. Mr Fallon says that the initial admission was intended to be temporary but, when Mrs Harrison returned home, his mother could not cope and Mrs Harrison went to live at Charnley House.
Mrs Harrison did not settle well at Charnley House and the daily diary reveals that she was quite disturbed and agitated at night. On occasions, she was given Melleril syrup. Melleril is the brand name for thioridazine, which is an anti-psychotic drug, commonly used in the 1970s to treat agitation in the elderly. On 2nd
September 1978, it was recorded that she had sore eyes. Mr Fallon mentions that that was his wedding day and his grandmother came to the ceremony. She sat in her wheelchair in the aisle.
When Mr Fallon returned from his honeymoon, he tried to visit his grandmother every day. She was not happy at Charnley House and, at times, was rather cantankerous. The daily diary shows that she was still disturbed.
On 7th
September 1978, Mrs Harrison had another disturbed night. Her decline seems to have begun on the morning of Saturday, 9th
September when again she was agitated. On Sunday, 10th September she was said to be a little breathless. On Wednesday, 13th
September, Shipman visited her and diagnosed heart failure. He suggested that she be given Dyazide, a diuretic, which Dr Grenville says would be appropriate. Shipman arranged to revisit the following day and did so, although there is no record of any discussion about Mrs Harrison's condition. He said he would call to see Mrs Harrison and another patient the following week. Mrs Harrison was put back to bed after lunch. That evening, she was agitated and was unwilling to be helped with her personal hygiene.
Mr Fallon visited Mrs Harrison two or three days before she died. She was in bed and, although he talked to her, she was unresponsive. She slept a lot and 'did not seem to have any life about her'.
According to the daily diary, Mrs Harrison seemed much better on the morning of Friday, 15th
September. She was dressed and taken into the lounge. That night, she was calm and quiet but was breathing very quickly.
On the morning of Saturday, 16th
September, Mrs Harrison had no breakfast. Shipman visited her. The diary note reads as follows:
'Dr Shipman, been to see Mrs Harrison, says she is
very ill, relatives informed, no medication, just nursing
care to be given'
.
The evening report for that day records that Mrs Harrison seemed a little better and took a drink. She slept all night, and it is recorded that no tablets were given, either on the Saturday evening or on the Sunday morning, because of Shipman's instruction that no medication should be given.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of Sunday, 17th
September, the daily diary note records that there was no change in Mrs Harrison's condition. She seemed a little weaker and her breathing was heavy. She took some Complan and ice cream. That evening, it was said that her condition had not changed and she seems to have taken a little ice cream. Mr Fallon visited that evening and stayed until 8pm. He recalls that Mrs Harrison was in bed and was very sleepy. He was rather upset because a member of staff told him not to try to 'bring her round'. The daily diary records that Mrs Harrison died at 10.45pm. It is said that the staff on duty gave all necessary care and attention. There is no record of any doctor attending that day, either while Mrs Harrison was still alive or after she had died. The undertaker, Mr Massey, collected the body at 11.30pm and Mrs Harrison's relatives were informed. Mr Fallon confirms that the family was informed at that time.
Certification
Shipman certified that the cause of Mrs Harrison's death was senility. On the MCCD counterfoil, he recorded that Mrs Harrison had died at Charnley House on 17th
September 1978 at the age of 96. He said that he had last seen her alive on 16th
September and this is consistent with the daily diary.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville says that 'senility' can be used interchangeably with 'old age' as a cause of death. Mrs Harrison's prescription for Melleril suggests that she may have been confused. However, Dr Grenville suspects that Shipman used senility as a cause of death because he was unsure of the true cause of death. Dr Grenville doubts that it was appropriate as a cause. The most likely cause, in Dr Grenville's view, was heart failure, probably due to underlying ischaemic heart disease. He says that the decision not to admit Mrs Harrison to hospital following the diagnosis of heart failure was reasonable. The upheaval associated with admission would have been detrimental to her health and would probably not have served to prolong her life. Dr Grenville notes the withdrawal of medication on 16th
September and concludes that, overall, Shipman's management of Mrs Harrison was reasonable.
Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry, says that on the basis of the available information it is not possible to say whether the decision to withdraw medication was appropriate or not. As a matter of good practice, the decision should have been discussed with Mrs Harrison's relatives and carers.
Neither doctor suggests that the withdrawal of medication hastened the death.
Conclusion
When Mrs Harrison was first admitted to Charnley House, she was unable to stand or walk. It is not clear whether her mobility improved after admission but she seems to have been quite agitated and to have developed heart failure. She deteriorated and, when seen by Mr Fallon two or three days before death, was sleeping a lot and seemed lifeless. It would appear that her death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
In the last few days, there are signs in the daily diary that Mrs Harrison was suffering from congestive heart failure and possibly bronchopneumonia. The fast breathing, later described as heavy, would be consistent with either or both of these conditions, which are common causes of death in the very old. The description of Mrs Harrison's decline sounds entirely typical of a natural death.
There is no evidence that Shipman had access to Mrs Harrison shortly before her death and no reason to suspect that he administered any drug which might have hastened her death. I feel some concern about Shipman's direction to withdraw Mrs Harrison's medication, at least without any discussion with Mr Fallon, who was visiting his grandmother very frequently and who would, I am sure, have been ready and willing to discuss the issue. However, Dr Esmail and Dr Grenville do not suggest that the withdrawal hastened Mrs Harrison's death.
On the evidence, I could not say that the withdrawal of the diuretic was wrong and, in any event, it seems to me that the decision could not have made a significant difference to the length of Mrs Harrison's life. I am quite satisfied that she died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001