The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Sarah Hawkins
Introduction
Mrs Sarah Hawkins, known as Ettie, died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Wednesday, 23rd
July 1980 at the age of 77. It is not known whether, or for how long, she had been a patient of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was senility.
The only information which the Inquiry initially had about this death was the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') which named Mr Kenneth Thewlis, the husband of Mrs Hawkins' niece, as the informant. He was traced by the Inquiry but neither he nor Mrs Thewlis was in a position to supply any information beyond that which was already available.
The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Hawkins' death certificate, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, Shipman's visits book for 1980 and the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary for 1980.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
Mrs Hawkins was admitted to Charnley House on 8th
February 1980. Her next of kin was recorded to be her niece, Mrs Heaton. The daily diary entries reveal that, by July, Mrs Hawkins was very poorly and the staff did not expect her to live long. She was confined to bed, had little appetite, needed full nursing care and was in some pain as a result of bedsores on her back.
On Friday, 18th
July 1980, Mrs Hawkins' condition was deteriorating and Shipman was sent for. Although the daily diary does not record his visit, it does record advice which was probably given by him, that:
'Mrs Hawkins, to remain in bed on her tummy, new
dressings to start to-morrow, (if she is still with us)
(All care given)'
.
That night, Mrs Hawkins was very disturbed and, although she was a little better the next day, on the night of 20th
July, she passed another bad night.
On Monday, 21st
July, Shipman came to see Mrs Hawkins. His intention to visit is noted in his own visits book, accompanied by a reference to the district nurse. The daily diary for that day contains a note that Mrs Hawkins was to start a course of injections, to be administered by the district nurse. Subsequent entries show that the district nurse attended morning and evening until Mrs Hawkins' death two days later. These injections were of Largactil and Duramorph. Largactil is an anti-psychotic drug, commonly given to calm patients who are agitated or distressed. Duramorph is an opioid analgesic, no doubt intended to relieve Mrs Hawkins' severe pain. These drugs plainly gave Mrs Hawkins significant relief from pain, as it is noted that, following the first injection, Mrs Hawkins slept well. There are no further references to pain or disturbed nights, although it is clear from the daily diary that Mrs Hawkins' condition continued to deteriorate until she died, at 3pm on 23rd
July. Dr Napier, who practised at the Donneybrook Surgery, came to Charnley House, presumably to certify the fact of death. Shipman came at about 5.30pm to certify the cause of death.
The evening report in the daily diary recorded that the district nurse attended at 10pm, intending to give Mrs Hawkins her injection, and disposed of the remaining ampoules of Largactil and Duramorph.
There is no evidence that Shipman saw Mrs Hawkins after 21st
July, when he arranged for the injections to be given. Mrs Hawkins' name does not appear in his visits book after that day, and Shipman's name does not appear in the daily diary.
Certification
It appears that, on 23rd
July 1980, Shipman completed the MCCD. On the counterfoil, he stated that Mrs Hawkins had died, as the result of senility, at Charnley House that day. It also states that Shipman had last seen Mrs Hawkins on the previous day, 22nd
July, which is not borne out by the daily diary. It seems likely that this is an error with no sinister connotation.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Hawkins died of natural causes. It is clear from the daily diary that Mrs Hawkins was very ill and was expected to die. It appears to me that Shipman's management of her terminal phase was entirely appropriate. The drugs administered by the district nurse appeared to give substantial relief. I think it is most unlikely that Shipman would have prescribed excessive amounts of these drugs if they were to be administered by the district nurse. There is no evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Hawkins on the day of her death and the available evidence suggests that he did not come to Charnley House that day until over two hours after the death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001