The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Alline Devolle Holland
Introduction
Ms Alline Devolle Holland died at The Sycamores, a residential home for the elderly, Victoria Street, Hyde on Monday, 3rd
August 1981 at the age of 84. Her marital status is not known nor is it known whether, or for how long, she had been a patient of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was senility.
The Inquiry has been unable to trace any relative of Ms Holland but has taken a witness statement from Mrs June Brimelow, who was working as a deputy officer at The Sycamores at the time of the death. The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and Shipman's visits book for 1981. Neither the records kept by The Sycamores nor Ms Holland's medical records have survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
Almost nothing is known about Ms Holland's circumstances, except that she was resident at The Sycamores. She had a nephew, Mr Martin Holland, who was the informant in relation to her death. Mrs June Brimelow cannot remember Ms Holland but speculates that she may have been an emergency unit resident.
The only reference to Ms Holland in Shipman's visits book appears on 21st
July 1981 when he noted that she was to be seen by the district nurse and geriatrician.
There are no entries in Shipman's visits book for the seven day period beginning on Saturday, 1st
August and ending on Friday, 7th
August. The entry for Friday, 31st
July reads
'Holiday Health Team'
and the entry for Friday, 7th
August reads simply
'Holiday'.
There are no entries at all between those two dates.
Despite the fact that he seems to have been on holiday during the week of Ms Holland's death, it appears that Shipman completed the MCCD on 3rd
August. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On this, Shipman stated that Ms Holland had died of senility on 3rd
August 1981 at The Sycamores. He said that he had last seen her alive on 21st
July. He said that he had seen the body after death and that there would be no post-mortem examination.
Conclusion
I regret to say that there is insufficient material upon which I can make a decision. Whilst it may be thought unlikely that Shipman would have killed one of his patients in a nursing home, the possibility cannot be ruled out.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001