The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Emma Hirst
Introduction
Mrs Emma Hirst died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Thursday, 8th
July 1982 at the age of 86. She was probably a patient of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
The only information available to the Inquiry about this death was the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), which named Mrs Ada Knowles, Mrs Hirst's daughter, as the informant. Mrs Knowles is now dead but her son, Mr David Knowles, has provided a statement of evidence. The Inquiry has also taken a statement from Mrs Winifred Lanceley, the former owner of Charnley House. The Inquiry has had access to the death certificate, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, Shipman's visits book for 1982 and the admissions register and daily diary from Charnley House. Mrs Hirst's medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Hirst was a strong and active woman who lived alone for some years following the death of her husband. She was admitted to Charnley House from her home at 28 Farm Lane, Hyde on 12th
May 1980. She was suffering from dementia and was admitted on Shipman's advice after her children had become concerned about her. She was physically quite well at that time and remained so until shortly before her death. Mr Knowles visited her at least once a week. She used to sit in the residents' lounge. She seemed to recognise her family but sometimes was confused.
According to the Charnley House diaries, Mrs Hirst deteriorated about two weeks before her death. There was nothing specifically wrong but she was not eating much and seemed unwell. On Monday, 28th
June 1982, when Mrs Hirst was
'still not well'
, it was decided that she should be seen by Shipman on the following day. He duly attended on Tuesday, 29th
June and said the current regime of care should continue and he would review her in two weeks' time.
On Thursday, 1st
July, it was noted that Mrs Hirst had passed blood. Shipman was told and advised that she should be carefully observed. The following day, Shipman saw Mrs Hirst and told the staff that she had had a slight stroke. He said that he would visit again soon, concerning some tests. However, it appears from the daily diary that he did not see her again before her death.
Mr Knowles' recollection coincides closely with the impression given by the daily diary. He recalls visiting his grandmother in the week before she died. She was in bed, under the covers, and appeared to be very weak. She was semi-conscious and was unable to talk to him. Her condition had deteriorated dramatically since his last visit. He was told, he thinks by his mother, that his grandmother had had a stroke.
Mrs Hirst deteriorated on Wednesday, 7th
July and her relatives visited her. She only took fluids that night.
The Day of the Death
The morning shift report in the Charnley House daily diary for Tuesday, 8th July records as follows:
'Mrs Hirst passed away 10.45am. police will inform
Relations undertakers coming about 2pm. Body
taken to Robinson Market St Hyde 368 2441
Mrs V . . . Dr Shipman will refer her'
.
There is no evidence that Shipman saw Mrs Hirst that morning while she was alive. It is clear that he was at the home at some time that morning. The diary does not make it plain why he was summoned. There is no indication that he was asked to see 'Mrs V', who was another patient of his.
Mrs Lanceley has no recollection of Mrs Hirst, but she has examined the diary entries. She thinks that Mrs Hirst died before Shipman visited Charnley House on 8th
July. She says that, if Shipman had visited Mrs Hirst before 10.45am, she would have noted his visit in the diary and the entry would have appeared in the diary before the entry recording her death. She has said that it is likely that there would also have been an entry noting that a visit had been requested by whichever member of staff telephoned Shipman's surgery. Mrs Lanceley has said also that she is sure that she would have informed Shipman of Mrs Hirst's death, although she recognises that that is not recorded in the diary. Finally, Mrs Lanceley has said that, if Shipman's visit to the other resident had been requested, then Shipman would have visited after the completion of his morning surgery, at some time between 11.30am and midday.
The fact that Mrs Hirst's name appears before the entry relating to Shipman in the morning report does not necessarily mean that the events occurred in that sequence. According to the generic evidence of Mrs Lanceley and other members of staff at Charnley House, the report for a given shift was usually created at the end of the shift. Therefore, the diary is not strictly contemporaneous and events would not necessarily be entered in strict chronological order. They may have been entered in the order in which they came to the mind of the author or of the perceived importance of events.
Shipman's visits book for 8th
July contains Mrs Hirst's name, with the letters
'
D.C.
'
alongside. The visits book does not contain any reference to Mrs V. This suggests that Shipman was asked to attend to certify the death of Mrs Hirst and took the opportunity to see Mrs V.
It seems to me highly likely that Shipman was asked to attend at Charnley House to certify Mrs Hirst's death. Although there is a theoretical possibility that he attended to see Mrs V and also saw Mrs Hirst while she was alive, I regard that as so unlikely that I discount it.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. The certificate itself has not survived but the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman said that Mrs Hirst had died of a cerebrovascular accident on 8th
July 1982. He said that he had last seen her alive on 2nd
July, which is consistent with the other documentary records. He said that he had seen the body after death. He said that there would not be a post-mortem examination. He also made some notes on the counterfoil which appear to have been intended to remind him what he should put on cremation Form B if asked to complete one. These notes suggest that he would have said that he had attended Mrs Hirst for six weeks during which time she had had
'multiple little ones'
, presumably strokes. He also seems to have noted that she had been in a coma for 24 hours.
It is not known whether Mrs Hirst was cremated. If she was, the cremation forms have not survived.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Hirst died as a result of natural causes, as certified by Shipman.
Her deterioration during the last two weeks of life is well documented in the Charnley House daily diary and is confirmed by the recollection of Mr Knowles. It appears that she had had a stroke and this may well have been the latest of several. Her death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
There is no positive evidence that Shipman saw Mrs Hirst alive on the day of her death. Indeed the evidence strongly suggests that he did not.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001