The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
George Eric Higginbottom
Introduction
Mr George Eric Higginbottom died at his home, 14 Kingston Gardens, Hyde on Saturday, 7th
March 1987 at the age of 66. He had probably been a patient of Shipman for about 9 years. Shipman certified the cause of Mr Higginbottom's death as carcinoma of the stomach.
The police did not investigate the death and there has been no inquest.
The Inquiry has been in contact with Mr Higginbottom's brother and sister-in-law but they have been unable to provide detailed information about the circumstances of the death and the Inquiry has no evidence. Mr Higginbottom's medical records have not survived. The Inquiry does, however, have the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), the cremation forms, the duty doctor diary and Shipman's own visits book for the year of the death.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
Mr Higginbottom's widow is now dead and the couple had no children. His sister-in-law has told the Inquiry that Mr Higginbottom died of cancer and had been semi-conscious for some time before his death. She and her husband had spent a good deal of time at the bedside but were not present at the time of the death.
Shipman's visits book suggests that he visited Mr Higginbottom on 20th
February, 27th
February, 2nd
March and 6th
March.
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that Mr Higginbottom died of carcinoma of the stomach on 7th
March 1987. He said that he had last seen Mr Higginbottom alive on 6th
March. He said that he had seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination.
On Form B of the cremation certificate, Shipman stated that Mr Higginbottom died at 11.15am on 7th
March 1987, in the presence of his wife who, together with the district nurse, had nursed him during his illness. Shipman stated that Mr Higginbottom had been in a coma for about 24 hours before his death. He also said that he had attended Mr Higginbottom for three months during his last illness and had last seen him alive 18 hours before his death, which would be at about 5pm on 6th
March. That entry is consistent with the MCCD counterfoil and the visits book. There is no indication in the visits book that Shipman intended to visit Mr Higginbottom on 7th
March. Indeed, his visits book suggests that he would be attending a sporting event that day. He was not the doctor on duty that weekend.
On Form B, Shipman said that he had examined the body about 15 minutes after the death. Mr Higginbottom's sister-in-law says that she thought it was Dr Bennett who attended after the death.
Conclusion
It is clear that Mr Higginbottom was suffering from terminal cancer and had not long to live. His wife was nursing him with help from the district nurses. Shipman had visited quite regularly during the last two weeks of his life. It is highly likely that Mr Higginbottom was receiving pain-relieving medication at this time.
All the documentation suggests that Shipman did not visit Mr Higginbottom on 7th
March until after the death. In those circumstances, it would seem clear that Shipman could not have killed Mr Higginbottom or have done anything to hasten his death. However, as Shipman himself is the author of all the documentation, the contents cannot be accepted at face value. He is known to have made false entries on many cremation forms. It is entirely possible that Shipman called on Mr Higginbottom on the morning of 7th
March (not making any entry in his visits book) and administered an injection of opiate in sufficient quantity to ensure that Mr Higginbottom died that day. If the injection were a lethal dose, the death would have occurred within the hour.
In the absence of a witness with knowledge of the circumstances of the death, it is impossible for me to reach a decision about this case. It might be thought that it is fanciful to suggest that Shipman hastened Mr Higginbottom's death when there is no positive evidence to suggest that he did and every reason to think that Mr Higginbottom was close to a natural death. In my view, it is not fanciful, as, by 1987, Shipman was a serial killer. Many of the patients he had killed were in poor health and there were others, close to death, whose ends he had hastened.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001