The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
William Hague
Introduction
Mr William Hague died at Bowlacre, a residential home for the elderly, Elson Drive, Stockport Road, Gee Cross, Hyde on Thursday, 15th
November 1984 at the age of 89. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Hague's death was bronchopneumonia.
In September 2001, the Inquiry published a list of deaths which had been certified by Shipman, but where it had not been possible to trace a relative. In response to that advertisement, Mrs Valerie Wood, Mr Hague's niece, contacted the Inquiry and provided a statement. The Inquiry also took a statement from Mrs Sandra Holdsworth, who, in 1984, was the manager of Bowlacre. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1984. Mr Hague's medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Hague's wife died in 1981 and after that he lived alone. About a year before his death, Mr Hague had a fall and sustained injuries for which he was treated at Tameside General Hospital for almost a year. Then, two or three weeks before his death, he was transferred to Bowlacre. There, his niece visited him on two or three occasions each week. Mrs Wood formed the impression that her uncle was not as happy at Bowlacre as he had been in hospital and was having difficulty in adjusting to the new routine.
Mrs Holdsworth remembers that Mr Hague had been resident at the home for only a short period when he died. The Inquiry has contacted other members of staff who worked at Bowlacre in 1984. Not surprisingly, given the brevity of his stay, none can remember Mr Hague.
A few days before his death, Mr Hague developed a chest infection. Mrs Wood visited him on Wednesday, 14th
November, the day before he died and found him very ill. He was confined to bed and his breathing was wheezy and very laboured.
Mr Hague's name appears in Shipman's visits book on Wednesday, 7th
November, Monday, 12th
November, Tuesday, 13th
November and Wednesday, 14th
November. Next to the entry on 13th
November, the words:
'allow to
(
illegible
)
'
, appear. The last word is indecipherable, although it seems to begin with 'd'. It is possible that the last word is a misspelling of 'die'. As it is not known what treatment Mr Hague had been on, it is not possible to form any view as to whether there might have been a positive decision to withdraw treatment.
The Day of the Death
On 15th
November 1984, a member of staff at Bowlacre telephoned Mrs Wood to tell her that her uncle had died. There is no evidence as to the time of death. Although she went to Bowlacre that day, Mrs Wood did not see her uncle's body. She says that her uncle's death was not unexpected and she had never regarded it as suspicious.
Mrs Holdsworth has provided some background information about the practices at Bowlacre at the time of Mr Hague's death. She said that whenever a doctor arrived at the home to see a resident, she would accompany the doctor and stay with the resident throughout the consultation. Usually, the doctor would give her a prescription, which a member of staff would take to the pharmacy. If the prescribed medication were to be given by injection, this would usually be done by a qualified nurse on the staff. If ever a doctor gave an injection himself, Mrs Holdsworth would expect to be given the prescription for the drug and the used ampoule for disposal. All doctors' visits were recorded in the daily report book. A full record of every resident's medication was kept. Unfortunately, these records were routinely destroyed about six years after the resident's death.
Mr Hague's name appears in Shipman's visits book for 15th
November.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not been recovered, but its counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman recorded that he had last seen Mr Hague alive on the day of his death, which is consistent with the entry in his visits book. Shipman said that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that he had seen the body after death. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 16th
November 1984, the day after death.
Conclusion
In my view it is likely that Mr Hague died a natural death. Mrs Wood recalls that he was very unwell before he died and the death was expected. Mrs Wood's description of her uncle's condition on the day before the death is entirely typical of bronchopneumonia. There is good evidence to support the cause of death certified by Shipman.
It is entirely possible that Shipman visited Mr Hague on the day of his death. He had also visited him on four other occasions in the previous week and had not administered a lethal injection. It is possible that Shipman did give an excessive dose of opiate to Mr Hague shortly before his death. However, if the system described by Mrs Holdsworth operated as it should, I think it is unlikely that Shipman would have risked giving an inappropriate injection. I cannot say that the system always operated as it should, but it seems likely that Mrs Holdsworth might have remembered if Shipman gave an injection but would not hand over the used ampoule. Although I cannot rule out the possibility that Shipman hastened Mr Hague's death by giving an inappropriate injection, I think it highly likely that the death was entirely natural.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001