The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ethel Doris Holgate
Introduction
Mrs Ethel Doris Holgate died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Saturday, 18th
July 1981 at the age of 91. She was a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was senility.
The Inquiry has obtained a witness statement from Mrs Holgate's son, Mr Eric Holgate, and has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, the cremation documents, Shipman's visits book for 1981 and the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville. Mrs Holgate's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
For many years, Mrs Holgate lived alone in sheltered accommodation in Stalybridge. By 1979, she was finding it difficult to manage on her own; she had had several falls and her eyesight was beginning to fail. She remained mentally alert. She moved to Charnley House on 4th
September 1979. She settled in well and enjoyed the company and the activities. Mr Holgate and his wife visited Mrs Holgate three or four times a week.
Mrs Holgate remained reasonably well until a few weeks before her death, when she lost her appetite and began to feel very tired. According to the Charnley House daily diary, on the evening of Sunday, 28th
June 1981, she was unwell, breathless and restless. She was seen by Shipman on Monday, 29th
June and he prescribed a course of injections. In the absence of the medical records it is not possible to discover what these were but it seems likely that they were designed to improve Mrs Holgate's general condition and may well have been vitamin B12. A nurse attended on Friday, 3rd
July to give Mrs Holgate her next injection.
On the morning of Tuesday, 7th
July 1981, Mrs Holgate's condition deteriorated quite rapidly. The doctor was sent for and her relatives were informed. Shipman agreed that she should have no further injections. No other medication was prescribed.
On Wednesday, 8th
July, Mrs Holgate was said to be a little brighter. It is recorded that she and a fellow female resident, who was also very unwell, were given
'all care'
and that both ladies were turned. This suggests that Mrs Holgate was confined to bed. The evening entry in that day's diary records that after she had been settled for the night she was turned every two hours.
On Friday, 10th
July, Mrs Holgate's condition was said to be poor. She did not improve after that. During the night of 14th
to 15th
July, Mrs Holgate had been very disturbed. On Thursday, 16th
July, Shipman saw her and directed that she be given 5ml of
'hemi'
at night and that she was also to be catheterised. Heminevrin is a hypnotic drug used in the treatment of insomnia in the elderly.
Mr Holgate recalls that, about a week before his mother died, a member of staff from the home told him that his mother was very unwell and was staying in bed. He and his wife visited her every day after that. She seemed very weak and was lying in bed on a lambswool rug, so as to prevent pressure sores. Mr Holgate realised that his mother was dying. By the eve of her death, it was clear that her death was imminent.
The daily diary reveals that, on the night of Friday, 17th
to Saturday, 18th
July, Mrs Holgate had a very restless night. It appears that the Heminevrin was having only limited effect.
The Day of the Death
The daily diary entry for Saturday, 18th
July reads as follows:
'MRS HOLGATE PASSED AWAY PEACEFULLY AT 10.30AM
CERTIFIED BY DR SHIPMAN'
.
Mrs Holgate's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for that day. Nor is there any suggestion that he was to visit any other resident of Charnley House. Mr Holgate remembers receiving a call from the home at about 10am. He was told that his mother was very close to death and that he should come immediately. He did so but by the time he arrived his mother had already died. At the home there was no mention that a doctor had attended.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. Shipman completed that on the day of the death and said that he had last seen Mrs Holgate alive on 16th
July 1981. It is clear from the daily diary that he had seen her on that day and the visits book shows that he attended at Charnley House to see another resident who was also his patient. He almost certainly saw them both.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Holgate had died at 10.30am on 18th
July. He said that he had been her ordinary medical attendant for 19 months and that he had attended her during her last illness for six weeks. He said again that he had last seen Mrs Holgate alive on 16th
July 1981. He said that he had seen her body two hours after death and that he had carried out a complete external examination of it. He said that the mode of death was coma lasting six hours. His answers in relation to mode and cause of death were said to be based on statements made by the staff at Charnley House, including Mrs Lanceley who was the director of Charnley House. He said that Mrs Holgate had been nursed by the staff at Charnley House and by Mr and Mrs Lanceley. He said that no one had been present at the moment of death. None of those entries gives rise to any concern or suspicion that they might not be true.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker examined the information contained in the cremation certificate and did not find the death suspicious.
Dr Grenville has prepared a report and had available to him all the evidence obtained by the Inquiry. He said that senility was used interchangeably with old age as a cause of death. In the light of Mrs Holgate's condition and assuming that Shipman was unable to make a clear diagnosis of an acute event causing death, it was reasonable to certify that senility was the cause of her death. Dr Grenville inferred that a decision had been made to treat Mrs Holgate at Charnley House and not admit her to a hospital or nursing home. He says that as a matter of good practice, the decision about where an elderly person is to be nursed should be discussed with the patient where appropriate and with her relatives or carers. He says that Shipman's decision to prescribe Heminevrin was appropriate.
Conclusion
Mrs Holgate was clearly unwell in the weeks before her death. Her appetite was poor and she was very agitated at night. She was obviously very weak and required a high level of personal care from the staff. Her son recognised that her death was imminent. When it occurred, the death was neither sudden nor unexpected. I agree with Dr Grenville's evidence that it was not inappropriate for Shipman to certify that the death was due to senility.
Although Shipman had attended Mrs Holgate on several occasions during her final illness, there is no evidence to suggest that he visited her during the final hours and no reason to suspect that he administered any drug which might have had the effect of hastening her death.
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Holgate died of natural causes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001