The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
May Hurd
Introduction
Mrs May Hurd died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 1st
April 1986 at the age of 78. She had probably been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was carcinoma of the bladder.
In investigating Mrs Hurd's death, the Inquiry sought to contact Mrs Hurd's nearest surviving relative, identified on Form A of the cremation certificate as Mrs Annie White, Mrs Hurd's sister. Mrs White has since died but her daughter has been in contact with the Inquiry. She knew very little of the circumstances of the death, save that her aunt had been very ill and had deteriorated very rapidly towards the end of her life.
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs Hurd, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, the cremation certificate, Shipman's visits book for 1986, the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book and the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary. Mrs Hurd's medical records are also available. They were recovered by the police from Shipman's home.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
Mrs Hurd was the widow of Mr George William Hurd. Until his death, they had lived together at 45 Rosemount Crescent, Hyde. In May 1978, Mrs Hurd suffered a stroke or cerebrovascular accident from which she apparently made a good recovery. In 1980, she was having difficulty in walking and was seen at Tameside General Hospital, where she was diagnosed as suffering from osteoarthritis, aggravated by her obesity. At that time, she was taking Lanoxin, which may have been for heart failure or atrial fibrillation, and Moduretic, which is a diuretic. In August of that year, Mrs Hurd was admitted to Tameside General Hospital to give her relatives respite from caring for her. In April 1983, she had abdominal pain, which was thought to have its origin in a tuberculous infection dating back to 1926, of which there is confirmation in the documents.
These hospital attendances are broadly reflected in the handwritten general practitioner records, although the latter are extremely sparse.
Mrs Hurd was admitted to Charnley House on 3rd
February 1986, from her home in Rosemount Crescent. The daily diary for 3rd
February records that Mrs Hurd was very pleasant and was able to walk unaided with a frame. She was still weak from a bad bout of influenza and said that she had pain in her chest when coughing and breathing.
On Thursday, 6th
March 1986, Mrs Hurd was seen by Shipman at Charnley House. She had blood in her urine. Shipman prescribed an antibiotic and promised to collect a urine sample on 14th
March. There is an entry in Shipman's visits book for 6th
March but no corresponding entry in Mrs Hurd's handwritten general practitioner records.
Shipman returned to see Mrs Hurd on Friday, 14th
March 1986. He made some recommendations in connection with her medication and collected the urine sample. The entry in the handwritten general practitioner records confirms that Mrs Hurd still had blood in her urine and refers to her medication. According to the records, this was the last occasion on which Shipman saw Mrs Hurd alive.
Over the following days, it appears that Mrs Hurd's appetite was poor. The diary records that the consultant surgeon, Mr M Cooper Wilson, saw her on Thursday, 20th
March and diagnosed cancer of the bladder. He said that she was too weak to undergo an operation and he would treat her with medication. There is a letter from Mr Cooper Wilson to Shipman, dated 20th
March 1986, confirming what is said in the diary. He did not expect Mrs Hurd to live more than a few weeks.
Mrs Hurd's condition did not improve and, by Wednesday, 26th
March, she was taking only a very small amount of food. On Thursday, 27th
March, she was nursed in bed. Her condition worsened and, on Saturday, 29th
March, she was transferred to a single room. On Monday, 31st
March, her condition deteriorated further. She was seen by Dr Moysey who said that nothing could be done except to provide her with
'TLC'
, which means 'tender loving care'.
It is recorded in the Charnley House diary for Tuesday, 1st
April 1986 that Mrs Hurd died at 9.45pm. Dr Moysey certified the fact of her death at 10.40pm. Her relatives were informed. Mrs Hurd's body was taken to the chapel of rest.
Certification
Shipman appears to have completed the MCCD on Wednesday, 2nd
April 1986. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil is available. Shipman correctly recorded that Mrs Hurd had died on 1st
April 1986. He said, however, that he had last seen her alive on 20th
March 1986, which is probably incorrect. According to the records he saw her for the last time on 14th
March. There is no evidence that he visited Charnley House on 20th
March 1986, although he did visit to see other residents on 19th
March and 21st
March. It is possible that he saw Mrs Hurd on one or both of those days. Shipman said that another doctor, Dr Moysey, had seen the body after death and stated that there would be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He incorrectly recorded that Mrs Hurd had died on 1st
March 1986, rather than on 1st
April. He said that he had been her ordinary medical attendant for eight years and that he had attended her during her last illness for six months. He said that he had last seen her 13 days before her death and said that his partner had seen her two days previously. As already stated, this was probably inaccurate. He went on to say that he had seen the body 24 hours after the death, which may have been true.
Shipman stated on Form B that a left-sided cerebrovascular accident had contributed to the death. The mode of death was said to be coma lasting 12 hours. That was probably correct. Shipman said that his answers in relation to mode and cause of death were based on statements made by the Charnley House staff. When asked whether or not Mrs Hurd had undergone any operation during her final illness, Shipman said that she had not but added, accurately but unnecessarily, that seven days before her death she had been seen by a consultant who had confirmed the diagnosis and that her condition was inoperable. Shipman said that the staff at Charnley House had nursed Mrs Hurd during her last illness and that the staff there had found her dead body.
Shipman's claims on the MCCD and the Form B that he had last seen Mrs Hurd alive on 20th
March or shortly thereafter are something of a mystery. It is possible that Shipman took the opportunity to look in on Mrs Hurd on 19th
or 21st
March and that his entry on the MCCD was inaccurate only by one day. However, it is also possible that he last saw her on 14th
March and chose to make a misleading entry on both forms, giving the impression that he had seen Mrs Hurd within 14 days before her death. He often did this in the belief that it would avoid the need for the death to be referred to the coroner. That he probably falsely claimed that he had seen Mrs Hurd alive on 20th
March does not of itself raise any suspicion that he caused the death.
Shipman's conflicting claims about seeing the body after death are also rather strange. It is possible that he completed the MCCD on 2nd
April, before he went to see the body, then went to see the body and completed Form B saying that he had seen it. However, if Shipman knew he would have to go to the funeral parlour to see the body before completing Form B, one might have thought he would have delayed completing the MCCD until he had seen the body. It is also possible that he told a lie on Form B when claiming that he had seen the body. I have formed the view that he was cavalier about his duties of certification. Whatever the explanation, these discrepancies do not raise suspicion that he caused Mrs Hurd's death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker examined the contents of the medical records and the information contained in the cremation certificate and in neither respect did he find the death to be suspicious.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Hurd died of natural causes as certified by Shipman. Mrs Hurd was seen by two other doctors in the days before she died. Mr Cooper Wilson diagnosed inoperable bladder cancer and Dr Moysey, Shipman's partner at the Donneybrook Surgery, recognised her terminal illness and suggested that she be given palliative treatment only. There is no evidence that Shipman saw her in the days leading up to her death and it is extremely unlikely that he did so. Although Shipman stated that he had seen Mrs Hurd about 13 days before she died, the likelihood is that he said this in order to avoid the time and trouble involved in a referral to the coroner.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001