The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Alice Holt
Introduction
Mrs Alice Holt is certified as having died at her home, 147 Ashton Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 23rd
February 1982 at the age of 75. There is, however, some confusion about the date of her death. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was heart failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
Initially, the only information which the Inquiry had about this death was the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), which named Mrs Pamela Jean Ogden, Mrs Holt's daughter, as the informant. The Inquiry wrote to Mrs Ogden, who expressed some concern about the circumstances of her mother's death and provided a statement. The Inquiry has also taken a statement from Mr Paul Harrison, a former neighbour of Mrs Holt, and has had access to the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and to Shipman's visits book for 1982. Mrs Holt's general practitioner records have not survived.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Holt was a widow and lived alone. In May 1981, she fell and sustained a fractured hip. She was admitted to Tameside General Hospital and a plate was inserted in the hip. When she was discharged from hospital, Mrs Ogden moved her mother's bed downstairs to make it easier for her to manage. Mrs Holt took mild sleeping tablets because the pain in her hip was keeping her awake at night. For some time, Mrs Holt had had an underactive thyroid gland for which she took thyroxine. Many years before she died, Mrs Holt said to Mrs Ogden that she had 'a faulty heart valve', but Mrs Ogden does not think that she was taking any medication in respect of that problem.
Following Mrs Holt's discharge from hospital, her daughter visited three times a day in order to care for her. As Mrs Holt regained her mobility, Mrs Ogden visited her less often, although still on a daily basis.
Shipman visited Mrs Holt on a number of occasions following her hip fracture. Mrs Ogden was present during several consultations and remembers one when Shipman prescribed 'water tablets' because Mrs Holt's inactivity was causing her to retain fluid. Mrs Ogden is of the view that Shipman only visited her mother when a visit had been requested and that he did not call unless expected.
The last visit recorded in Shipman's visits book before Mrs Holt's death was on 19th
February 1982. Mrs Ogden has no recollection of a visit on that day and does not think one took place.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Ogden called at her mother's house at about 8.50am on Monday, 22nd
February. She found her mother up and dressed. She stayed until 11.50am, when she went to work. At the time, her mother was not ill. Had Mrs Ogden been concerned about her mother's health, she would have stayed with her or, at the very least, called to see her again after work. She did not do so and she did not see her mother alive again after leaving for work that morning. Mrs Holt did not have a telephone.
Mr Harrison's parents were retired at the time of Mrs Holt's death. Mr Harrison and his parents were neighbours of Mrs Holt and they were very friendly with her. They spent most of their time in the front room, which overlooked the road. Mr Harrison says that his parents had no recollection of seeing Shipman come to Mrs Holt's house on the day of her death. However, as Mr Harrison's mother is now dead and his father very elderly, I am not sure how reliable this recollection can be. Mr Harrison says that if Mrs Holt had felt unwell, she would have banged on the wall and Mr Harrison's mother would have gone round to see her. If necessary, Mrs Harrison would have telephoned for the doctor. As far as Mr Harrison is aware, Mrs Holt did not contact his parents on Monday, 22nd
February.
As Mr Harrison went to bed late in the evening of 22nd
February, he could hear Mrs Holt's television emitting the sounds made as the television station shut down for the night. He assumed that Mrs Holt must have fallen asleep in front of the television set.
On the morning of Tuesday, 23rd
February 1982, Mrs Ogden called at her mother's house at the usual time. She found her mother sitting in her usual armchair wearing a nightdress and dressing gown. She was obviously dead. The television and fire were on. Mrs Ogden described her mother's appearance in the following terms:
'She was a grey colour and she looked peaceful as though she had just gone to sleep. She was sitting back in her chair. She was not slumped'
.
From what Mrs Ogden knew of her mother's routine, she believed that she must have died the previous evening. She usually watched television in the evenings and not during the day. She would often get ready for bed, make herself 'tea' and then watch television from about 6.30pm.
Following the discovery of her mother's body, Mrs Ogden went next door and Mr Harrison's father telephoned the surgery. Shipman arrived about ten minutes later. He felt for a pulse and said that Mrs Holt was dead. He said that there could be a post-mortem examination if Mrs Ogden wanted one, but she said she did not. He said, 'I know what she has died of', although Mrs Ogden cannot remember what he said the cause of death was. She recalls that he told her that she could call at the surgery to collect the MCCD at any time after 11am.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. The certificate itself has not survived but its counterfoil has been recovered. On that, Shipman said that Mrs Holt had died on 24th
February 1982. Shipman dated the counterfoil 24th
February. It is recorded on the death certificate, which was issued on 24th
February, that Mrs Holt had died on 23rd
February. The witnesses suggest that she died during the evening of Monday, 22nd
February 1982. I cannot explain this confusion, save to suggest that it is possible that the witnesses are confused as to the dates and that Mrs Holt was in fact found dead on the morning of 24th
February. On the counterfoil, Shipman said that he had last seen Mrs Holt alive on 19th
February, that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that he had seen the body after death.
The cause of death was said to be heart failure due to ischaemic heart disease. Mrs Ogden says that this did not strike her as odd at the time, although she does not think that her mother would have died of a heart attack, as the only trouble she had was a build-up of fluid. The build-up of fluid might well have been a sign of congestive heart failure.
When Mrs Ogden first contacted the Inquiry, she said that her major concern was that the death certificate recorded that she was
'In attendance'
at her mother's death. She said that this was not the case. In fact the reference to daughter in attendance under the heading
'Qualification'
on the death certificate does not refer to the daughter being in attendance at the death, but rather in attendance at the time of the registration of the death. One of the options available to the registrar under the heading 'Qualification' is 'present at death'. Had the registrar intended to record that Mrs Ogden was present at death he would almost certainly have used that phrase. In any event, Shipman would probably not have played any part in the registration process and the completion of the death certificate is usually carried out following a conversation between the registrar and the informant, in this case Mrs Ogden.
Although Mrs Holt was cremated, the cremation certificate has not been found.
Conclusion
I regret to say that I am unable to say whether Mrs Holt's death was natural or resulted from an unlawful act on Shipman's part.
There is some evidence that Mrs Holt suffered from heart problems. Her daughter has a recollection of her saying that she had a 'faulty heart valve'. She also suffered from oedema, which may be a sign of congestive heart failure. There are, however, other explanations for oedema and it does not necessarily follow that Mrs Holt was suffering from heart failure. There is no report that she suffered from shortness of breath, which is another common symptom of congestive heart failure. However, as she led a very sedentary life, any shortness of breath might have gone unnoticed.
Congestive heart failure can lead to a sudden death. However, it does not usually do so unless the underlying chronic condition is quite severe. When Mrs Ogden last saw her mother, just before midday on 22nd
February, she was up and dressed and was not complaining of feeling unwell. Although these events occurred many years ago, Mrs Ogden is confident in saying that her mother was not unwell because, if she had been, Mrs Ogden would either have stayed with her or at the very least called in after work that day. I think it is unlikely that Mrs Holt's congestive heart failure had reached a severe stage. I think her daughter would have been aware of it. If Mrs Holt had become unwell during the day, she would have contacted her next door neighbours. It follows that Mrs Holt's deterioration and death later that day must be considered as somewhat sudden and unexpected. I could not say that such a deterioration and death could not have occurred so quickly. I accept that it could. However, it would not be typical of a death from heart failure.
It is possible that Mrs Holt had a heart attack. However, she was found sitting peacefully in a chair, with the outward appearance of being asleep. Her position and appearance in death were not typical of a death from any of the common causes of a sudden natural death. Her position and appearance are typical of those seen in many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of opiate.
There is no evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Holt on the day of her death. He had visited some three or four days earlier, on 19th
February. Mrs Holt's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book on either Monday, 22nd
February or Tuesday, 23rd
February. Although Mr Harrison says that his parents did not see Shipman visit Mrs Holt the day before her body was discovered, a visit cannot be ruled out. If Shipman did visit Mrs Holt and kill her, then according to what we know about her routine, the visit would have occurred some time after 6.30pm, when it would be dark. That, of course, would have been at the end of Shipman's working day. At the time, Shipman lived in Mottram and calling in to see Mrs Holt on Ashton Road would have involved only a small detour on his journey home from the Donneybrook Surgery.
There are suspicious features surrounding this death but I feel unable to make a positive decision. Had there been any cremation documents and had the medical records survived, the picture would, I think, have been clearer.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001