The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Marion Harrison
Introduction
Mrs Marion Harrison died at Norbury House, a residential home for the elderly, 70 Great Norbury Street, Hyde on Wednesday, 31st
October 1990 at the age of 68. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Miss Jane Harrison (one of Mrs Harrison's daughters) and Mrs Julia Anne Mackie (the former matron at Norbury House). The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Harrison's general practitioner records, the register of residents of Norbury House, Shipman's visits book for 1990, the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book, the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documents.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Until her admission to Norbury House, Mrs Harrison lived with Miss Jane Harrison. Several years before her death, Mrs Harrison began to suffer from senile dementia. She was a very heavy woman and had a history of chronic obstructive airways disease, varicose veins and poorly controlled hypertension. She had had a deep vein thrombosis. In 1987, she was investigated following a period of increased breathlessness. Dr C R Payne, a consultant from Tameside General Hospital, advised Shipman that there was no history of angina; there was no sign of cardiac failure; the electrocardiogram (ECG) was remarkably good; there was no evidence of acute ischaemic heart disease and no sign of left ventricular hypertrophy or strain on the heart. A chest x-ray showed that the heart appeared normal. Dr Payne formed the view that the breathlessness was due to airflow obstruction and not to any cardiac cause.
About a year before her admission to Norbury House, Mrs Harrison fell at home and fractured her femur. She was admitted to hospital for a hip replacement operation but never regained full mobility. Miss Harrison says that after this event, her mother became more confused and forgetful. Miss Harrison became concerned that it would not be safe to leave her mother at home while she was out at work and it was decided that Mrs Harrison would move into Norbury House.
Mrs Harrison was admitted to Norbury House in February 1989, about 18 months before she died. The register of residents contains a record of each resident's state of health and social circumstances upon admission. Mrs Harrison's history was recorded and the register contains a reference to Nuelin, a drug used for the treatment of airways obstruction and severe asthma. The note indicates that one tablet was to be taken twice daily.
Mrs Harrison had three daughters and one son who would each visit every two or three weeks, ensuring that Mrs Harrison was visited by at least one of her children each week.
Miss Harrison recalls that her mother was always up and about and quite active. She seemed generally quite well and did not often need to see Shipman. Miss Harrison recalls that her mother still continued to suffer with a bad chest and bouts of bronchitis.
Miss Harrison last saw her mother alive about two weeks before she died. She seemed to be well enough at that time. Then, about a week before Mrs Harrison died, Mrs Anne Bardsley, Miss Harrison's sister, telephoned her to say that Mrs Harrison had a cold. Miss Harrison remembers that her sister did not seem unduly concerned about their mother's condition.
The Day of the Death
At about 8am on 31st
October 1990, Miss Harrison's brother and his wife called at her house to say that they had been informed that Mrs Harrison had died during the night. Mrs Mackie had telephoned them with the news. Miss Harrison was surprised, as her mother's death had not been expected. Together they went to Norbury House where Mrs Mackie told them what had happened. She said that a care assistant had taken a cup of tea in to Mrs Harrison in the morning. A short time later the care assistant returned to find that Mrs Harrison had not drunk her tea and had died. Mrs Mackie said that she thought that Mrs Harrison had tried to get out of bed but had not succeeded. Miss Harrison understood that her mother had died at about 7am to 7.30am.
Mrs Mackie remembers that, at around 6.45am on 31st
October, a care assistant had 'buzzed her' to say that she had tried to get Mrs Harrison up to have a cup of tea but that she appeared confused. Mrs Mackie went to see Mrs Harrison who was losing consciousness. After a few minutes, Mrs Mackie noticed the blood draining away from Mrs Harrison's cheeks. When she checked her pulse she realised that she had died.
The final entry in the register of residents in respect of Mrs Harrison records that
'she passed away peacefully in her sleep'
at 7.10am on 31st
October 1990.
Mrs Harrison's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book on 30th
or 31st
October 1990.
Certification
The MCCD has not survived but its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman recorded that he had last seen Mrs Harrison alive on 24th
October 1990. Mrs Harrison's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for that date, indeed the relevant page is blank. Shipman certified that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis which was due to ischaemic heart disease and hypertension. He said that hypertension and chronic bronchitis had contributed to the death. Shipman said that there would not be a post-mortem examination. He said that another medical practitioner had seen the body after death, but that he had not. The initials
'DHC'
appear on the counterfoil, which suggests that Dr Derek Carroll was the doctor who had seen the body after death. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 31st
October 1990.
Mrs Harrison was cremated and Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Harrison died at 7am on 31st
October 1990, that he had been her ordinary medical attendant for 13 years and that he had attended her during her last illness for ten years. He claimed to have last seen Mrs Harrison alive seven days before she died and to have seen her body about three hours after death. He said that he had carried out an external examination. The causes of death were as on the MCCD counterfoil, save that hypertension appeared only as a contributory cause. The mode of death was said to be collapse lasting only seconds. Shipman said that this answer was based on information provided by staff at Norbury House. He said that the matron of Norbury House was present at the moment of death.
Conclusion
I am sure that Mrs Harrison's death was due to natural causes.
It is clear from her medical records that she was severely overweight and suffered from chronic breathing difficulties. In 1987, investigations did not reveal any cardiac problems. However, Mrs Harrison must have been at some risk of suffering a heart attack. Her death was sudden in that the staff had not anticipated that she might die and had not warned the family to expect it. However, against the background history, I do not think it could be said that her death was wholly unexpected or inexplicable.
Mrs Harrison died in the early morning, at a time when Shipman was almost certainly not at Norbury House. There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman saw Mrs Harrison in the hours or days before she died. There is therefore no reason to suspect that Shipman was in any way involved in Mrs Harrison's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001