The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Robert Hickson
Introduction
Mr Robert Hickson died at his home, 61 Chartist House, Hyde on Tuesday, 5th
December 1978 at the age of 76. He was a patient of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was carcinomatosis due to cancer of the stomach.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Ann Sweeney, Mr Hickson's daughter, and Mrs Jennifer Unsworth, the manager and resident warden of Chartist House. The Inquiry has also had access to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil and the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'). Mr Hickson's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Hickson had been separated from his wife, Mrs Phyllis Hickson, for many years. He lived alone in Chartist House, which was sheltered accommodation where Mrs Unsworth supervised the residents. Each flat had an emergency pull cord by which Mrs Unsworth could be summoned.
Mrs Sweeney says that her father enjoyed reasonably good health until a few months before he died, when his skin turned yellow. Shipman diagnosed anaemia and arranged for Mr Hickson to receive treatment. However, a while later, Mr Hickson was admitted to hospital for tests. About five weeks before her father died, a doctor from the hospital telephoned Mrs Sweeney to say that her father had advanced terminal cancer. Nothing more could be done for him.
Mr Hickson returned home to Chartist House and his health deteriorated steadily. He required assistance in washing and eating. He became increasingly frail and Mrs Sweeney feels sure that he was in pain, although he never complained of this. As far as Mrs Sweeney is aware, her father was not treated with painkillers in the weeks leading up to his death. She recalls that Shipman gave her a prescription for some tablets for his pain but she had not obtained these at the time of Mr Hickson's death.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Sweeney visited her father on the morning of 5th
December 1978. He was lying on a couch and looked yellow and frail. Nevertheless, he seemed to be in good spirits and chatted to his daughter. He did not seem to be depressed or worried about his health.
Later that afternoon, Mrs Sweeney was at home when she received a telephone call from Mrs Unsworth, asking her to return to Chartist House. Mrs Sweeney cannot now recall whether Mrs Unsworth told her over the telephone that her father had died or whether she was informed of his death when she arrived at Chartist House.
Mrs Sweeney and her husband went to Chartist House. Shipman was not there when they arrived. Mrs Unsworth said that Shipman had visited during the day but she did not say at what time he had called. Mrs Sweeney does not know whether Shipman visited her father before or after he died and is not sure who had found him dead. Mrs Sweeney recalls that her father was lying on the couch, in much the same position as she had left him earlier that day.
Unfortunately, Mrs Unsworth has no recollection of the circumstances surrounding and leading up to Mr Hickson's death.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that Mr Hickson died on 5th
December and that he had last seen him on 6th
December. This is an obvious error. As the counterfoil is dated 6th
December it seems likely that Shipman intended to say that he had last seen Mr Hickson alive on the day of his death. This would accord with what Mrs Unsworth told Mrs Sweeney. Shipman said that the cause of death was carcinomatosis due to cancer of the stomach. He said that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination.
The death certificate shows that Mr Hickson's wife registered the death.
Conclusion
It is clear that by the time of his death, Mr Hickson was at an advanced stage of terminal cancer. It appears that the death was not unexpected.
The evidence suggests that Shipman probably saw Mr Hickson on the day of his death. There is no evidence of the time of his visit. He usually carried out his visits between about noon and 3.30pm. We do not know how or at what time Mr Hickson died. Nor do we know how or at what time Mrs Unsworth became aware of Mr Hickson's death. If there was a close temporal association between Shipman's visit and the death, I would have a strong suspicion that Shipman had caused the death. I am satisfied that he would not have had any moral scruple about hastening the death of a patient with terminal cancer.
As the evidence is unclear on so many points, I feel unable to reach any decision. However, there is a real possibility that Shipman hastened Mr Hickson's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001