The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Janet Hallsworth
Introduction
Mrs Janet Hallsworth died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 20th
December 1994 at the age of 90. She had probably been a patient of Shipman for about 15 years. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Hallsworth's Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the cremation certificate, the practice documents from the Market Street Surgery, the admissions register and daily diary from Charnley House, and Mrs Hallsworth's handwritten and computerised medical records. No witness statements have been taken but the Inquiry has contacted Mrs Hallsworth's nephew, Mr Ian Kerfoot.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Hallsworth was admitted to Charnley House from her home in York Road, Hyde on 29th
March 1991. At the time of her admission, she was said to be very pleasant.
Mrs Hallsworth's health declined over the following three years. In particular, her mental state deteriorated significantly. In early 1994, she suffered a stroke which affected her right leg. She was seen by Shipman in October 1994 when, amongst other complaints, he noted that her walking was very poor and that her dementia was advancing quickly.
The Days Leading up to Death
At the beginning of December 1994, Mrs Hallsworth was one of several residents at Charnley House who were suffering sickness and diarrhoea. On 14th
December, there was a worsening in her condition. She was very sleepy and was eating very little. She was seen to be slumped in her chair with her head down.
Shipman visited to see Mrs Hallsworth on Thursday, 15th
December. He said that she was deteriorating because of her age. He said that he would call the following day. Her relatives were informed of her condition. The surgery visits book records the request for this visit and reflects the entries made the previous day in the Charnley House daily diary.
Shipman made the following entry in the medical records:
'Poor state. conscious level poor.
Not actually ill'
.
On Friday, 16th
December, the daily diary records that Mrs Hallsworth remained very poorly. She was visited by her brother-in-law (Mr Ian Kerfoot's father), Mr Victor Kerfoot, and also by Shipman. She was turned two hourly and took a small amount of fluid. Shipman made no written entry in the handwritten records, although the computerised records contain the following entry:
'O/E - old age
conscious to pain tlc'
.
This would suggest that Mrs Hallsworth was in a very poor condition and was barely conscious. She was to be given tender loving care.
On Saturday, 17th
December, Mrs Hallsworth's condition remained the same. She was seen by Shipman and he recorded in the computerised records that she was receiving terminal care, was unconscious and should be turned every two hours.
Shipman saw Mrs Hallsworth again on Sunday, 18th
December. According to the daily diary, her condition remained the same and her relatives telephoned to see how she was. She took only a very small sip of fluid. She was turned regularly.
On Monday, 19th
December, there was still no change in Mrs Hallsworth's condition. Her brother-in-law telephoned to see how she was. Shipman visited and promised to call on the following day.
The daily diary for Monday, 20th
December records that Mrs Hallsworth died at 1.30pm. Her brother-in-law came to see her. Shipman came to certify that Mrs Hallsworth was dead and the undertakers were informed.
Mr Ian Kerfoot has no concerns over the death of his aunt.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD on 21st
December 1994. He certified that the cause of death was old age. He stated that Mrs Hallsworth had died on 20th
December 1994 and that he had last seen her alive on 19th
December 1994. These dates coincide with all the available documentary material. He said that no post-mortem examination was to be held and that he had seen the body after the death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Hallsworth had died at about 1.30pm on 20th
December 1994. He said that he had attended Mrs Hallsworth during her last illness for seven days. This would suggest that he had in mind as the commencement of her last illness the events of Wednesday, 14th
December, when Mrs Hallsworth had become sleepy and had remained slumped in her chair. He said that he had last seen Mrs Hallsworth alive 24 hours before her death, which is consistent with the documentary material. The remaining entries all appear to be accurate and consistent with the other documentary material.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered the contents of the cremation forms and found that the death was not suspicious.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Hallsworth died as the result of natural causes and that it was entirely appropriate for Shipman to certify that her death was due to old age. She had deteriorated gradually over a period of at least a week. Her death was expected.
There is evidence that Shipman saw Mrs Hallsworth on 19th
December 1994. There is no evidence that he saw her again until after her death, when he attended to confirm that she had died. There is no reason to suspect that Shipman was unlawfully involved in Mrs Hallsworth's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001