The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Leonora Hamblett
Introduction
Mrs Leonora Hamblett died at her home, 9 St Michael's Road, Hyde on Saturday, 25th
August 1979 at the age of 78. She was a patient of Shipman and thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was congestive heart failure due to myocardial degeneration.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Geoffrey Hackney (Mrs Hamblett's nephew) and Mrs Gladys Bennett (the wife of Mr Stewart Bennett, another of her nephews). The Inquiry has also had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and Shipman's visits book for 1979. Mrs Hamblett's medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Hamblett lived with her husband. She had smoked cigarettes for many years and suffered from chronic bronchitis. During the last two or three years of her life, her health deteriorated and the bouts of bronchitis became more severe and more frequent. Mrs Bennett was of the opinion that Mrs Hamblett may also have had emphysema. Towards the end of her life, Mrs Hamblett became forgetful and confused. Shipman visited her regularly, often without prior arrangement, possibly because she lived on his route home from the surgery.
In the last two to three weeks of her life, Mrs Hamblett's health deteriorated so that she was confined to bed. The reason for her deterioration and the nature of her illness are not clear. Her husband looked after her and the district nurses visited regularly. According to Shipman's visits book he visited her on 11th
August and then not again until 23rd
August. However, it is quite possible that there were more visits than this but they were not entered in the book. Mrs Bennett says that Mr and Mrs Hamblett were very close and she does not think that Mr Hamblett would ever have left his wife alone with the doctor.
Mrs Bennett visited Mrs Hamblett on Thursday, 23rd
August, two days before she died. She was in bed and appeared very weak. She was having difficulty in breathing and was confused. Shipman visited and said that Mrs Hamblett was very unwell. That visit appears in his visits book. Mrs Bennett says that Shipman advised the family that if they could not detect a pulse in Mrs Hamblett's neck this would mean that she had died. Mrs Bennett says that, so far as she is aware, Shipman did not give Mrs Hamblett an injection on this or any other occasion.
Mr Hackney and his wife visited Mrs Hamblett on Friday, 24th
August. They found her in bed, obviously unwell and apparently close to death.
The Day of the Death
Mr Hackney and his wife called again to see Mrs Hamblett between 10.30am and 11am on Saturday, 25th
August 1979. Her condition had worsened overnight. She was drifting in and out of consciousness. A district nurse visited and said that Mrs Hamblett would not live long. She called Shipman. Mr Hackney and his wife then left the house for about an hour. When they returned, Mr Hamblett told them that his wife had died. Mr Hackney asked if Shipman had been and Mr Hamblett said that he had, but Mr Hackney does not know whether Shipman had visited before or after the death. Mr Hackney does not recall that anything else was said about the circumstances of the death.
Mrs Bennett's daughter also visited Mrs Hamblett at about midday on 25th
August. She reported to her mother that Mrs Hamblett was very unwell, could not speak and had tears in her eyes. Mrs Bennett believes that the death occurred soon after this visit.
Mrs Hamblett's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for that day.
Certification
The death certificate records that Mrs Hamblett's husband was the informant in relation to her death and that he was present at her death.
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not survived but the counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman certified the cause of death and recorded that he had last seen Mrs Hamblett alive on 23rd
August 1979, which is consistent with the entries in his visits book. He said that he had seen the body after death and there would not be a post-mortem examination. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 25th
August 1979, the day of the death.
Conclusion
As the medical records have not survived, it is not possible to discover the true nature of Mrs Hamblett's last illness. The family was aware that she had respiratory problems and thought these were due to bronchitis and emphysema. Shipman certified that the cause of death was congestive heart failure due to myocardial degeneration. In other words, he certified that the death was due to a cardiac condition. However, the symptoms of weakness and breathlessness noted by the family would be consistent with a death from either a respiratory or cardiac cause. It does not appear that Mrs Hamblett's death was either sudden or unexpected.
The cause for suspicion in this case arises from the fact that the district nurse apparently summoned Shipman whilst Mrs Hamblett was still alive and that Shipman may have arrived at the house before Mrs Hamblett died. The documentary evidence suggests that Shipman did not arrive until after the death. However, as Shipman is the author of the documents, they cannot be relied on as truthful or accurate. Shipman often made false entries on such documents when he wished to conceal his role in causing a death.
Mrs Bennett believes that Mr Hamblett would not have left his wife alone with Shipman during a visit. The death certificate records that he was present at the moment of his wife's death. Mr Hamblett did not apparently mention to the family that Shipman had given his wife an injection shortly before the death. These factors would tend to suggest that Shipman did not do anything to cause or hasten Mrs Hamblett's death.
My conclusion is that Mrs Hamblett probably died a natural death, but I cannot rule out the possibility that Shipman visited shortly before the death and administered something which hastened her death by a short time.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001