The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Hilda Hulme
Introduction
Mrs Hilda Hulme died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Friday, 27th
March 1987 at the age of 78. She was a patient of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was carcinoma of the ascending colon.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Christine Holland, the deputy matron at Charnley House at the time of Mrs Hulme's death. Mrs Hulme's son, Mr Kenneth Hulme, has written to the Inquiry but a statement has not been taken. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Hulme's general practitioner records, Shipman's visits book for 1987 and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer diary. In addition, the Charnley House daily diary and the admissions register have been made available to the Inquiry.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Hulme was a widow and was admitted to Charnley House on 9th
April 1982. She had developed a squamous cell carcinoma of the face, which was removed surgically on 6th
March 1986. There was no recurrence but she was plainly unwell and confused following the operation.
In the weeks before her death, Mrs Hulme ate very little and lost weight. On 5th
March 1987, a consultant physician made a domiciliary visit, at Shipman's request, and diagnosed senile dementia and post-operative depression.
The entries in the daily diary are self-explanatory. On 20th
March 1987, Mrs Hulme was very unwell and stayed in bed. Her relatives were summoned. She was to be turned every two hours, as her buttocks were sore. Shipman was called and made the following entry in the medical records:
'- lump in abdo very tender
? Ca
(
illegible
)
bowel
Cyclimorph PRN'.
That note records a tentative diagnosis of cancer of the bowel. Shipman issued a prescription for Cyclimorph, an opioid analgesic, to be given by injection. 'PRN' means 'as required'.
Mrs Hulme was a little better on 21st
March, although her condition deteriorated the following day. On 24th
March, the daily diary contained an instruction that Mrs Hulme was to be turned every two hours. She was noted to be taking fluids and to be relatively comfortable.
Shipman saw Mrs Hulme on 25th
March and recorded in the medical records that she was dehydrated. The daily diary notes that she was to start receiving injections, presumably of Cyclimorph.
At 10.45am on 26th
March, Mrs Holland gave Mrs Hulme a 10mg intramuscular injection of Cyclimorph. No change in her condition was noted in the afternoon, although she did take a small amount of fluid. At 9pm, she was given a similar dose of Cyclimorph, this time by H Jones.
The Day of the Death
The daily diary records that Mrs Hulme died at 5.40am on Friday, 27th
March 1987. There is no record that Shipman visited during that night or very early in the morning. According to the duty doctor transfer diary, Dr Moysey was on duty on the night of 26th
March, pursuant to the rota for out of hours cover between the Donneybrook doctors. There is no note in the diary to show that any doctor attended to certify the fact or cause of death.
Shipman made an entry in Mrs Hulme's medical record noting that she had died at about 8.30am of cancer of the colon.
There is an entry in Shipman's visits book for 27th
March, which might possibly refer to Mrs Hulme. It seems likely that, if it does, it relates to a request to attend at the home (or possibly at the funeral directors) to see the body.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not survived, but the counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. On that, Shipman stated that Mrs Hulme had died on 27th
March of carcinoma of the ascending colon. He said that he had last seen her alive on 26th
March. He said that he had seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 27th
March 1987.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Hulme had died at 8am, that he had been her ordinary medical attendant for a period of 15 months and that he had attended her during her last illness for three months. He said that he had last seen Mrs Hulme alive 24 hours before death and that he had seen the body about six hours after death. The mode of death was said to be coma lasting 36 to 48 hours. Mrs Holland has said that she had no recollection of Mrs Hulme but has inferred from the entries in the daily diary that Mrs Hulme was not in a coma for the 48 hours before she died. Shipman said that Mrs Hulme's son and daughter were present at the moment of death. It appears from the daily diary and from the recollection of Mr Kenneth Hulme that that was probably not so.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered Mrs Hulme's medical records and then separately the cremation certificate. On the basis of each he concluded that the death was not suspicious. He commented as follows:
'late presentation of ca bowel, no information recorded to explain basis of the diagnosis, no investigation, seen by physician before diagnosis made but not reported by him...
It could be a justified diagnosis, but not established and there are other possibilities'
.
Conclusion
As Professor Baker has observed, the diagnosis of cancer of the bowel on 20th
March was somewhat tentative and carcinoma of the ascending colon was one of a number of potential causes of death. Having said that, Mrs Hulme's condition was very poor in the days leading up to her death. She was not eating and taking only a little fluid. She was confined to bed and suffering a great deal of pain. Her death does not appear to have been either sudden or unexpected.
It appears that the prescribed dose of Cyclimorph would be appropriate for the relief of Mrs Hulme's pain. It appears also that this drug was administered by the Charnley House staff and not by Shipman. There is therefore no reason to suspect that an excessive amount would be given deliberately. In any event, it appears that Mrs Hulme lived for about nine hours after the second dose was given. That dose could not have had any direct effect on the timing of her death.
There is no record that Shipman saw Mrs Hulme shortly before her death. It seems likely that she died at about 5.40am. It is extremely unlikely that Shipman would have come to the home at that hour of the day. I think I can safely rule out that possibility.
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Hulme died a natural death, probably of the cause certified by Shipman.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001