The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Elizabeth Haslam
Introduction
Mrs Mary Elizabeth Haslam died at her home, 38 Mansfield Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 7th
August 1984 at the age of 77. She had probably been registered as a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the large bowel.
The Inquiry has taken a witness statement from Mrs Haslam's son, Mr David Haslam. The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and Shipman's visits book for 1984.
Personal Background
Immediately prior to her death, Mrs Haslam was living with Mr Haslam and her daughter, Mrs Ivy Jones. She suffered from angina and arthritis for which Shipman gave her medication. Her daughter used to care for her. In the few months before she died she complained of more generalised pains and, in the week before she died, her bed was moved downstairs. She became jaundiced and she was in considerable pain.
Mrs Haslam's name appears in Shipman's visits book for Wednesday, 1st
August, Friday, 3rd
August and Monday, 6th
August 1984.
Mr Haslam remembers that such visits took place and that Shipman said some days before the death that Mrs Haslam did not have long to live because she had cancer. He said that he would treat her with morphine but that she probably would not survive beyond Tuesday 7th
August. From that time, Mrs Haslam ate very little and passed in and out of consciousness. She also suffered hallucinations.
Mr Haslam says that on Monday, 6th
August, when Shipman visited Mrs Haslam, he probably gave her some morphine. He believes that Shipman did so because that is what had been planned and because he himself observed that after Shipman's visit, his mother was no longer in pain.
The Day of Death
Although Mrs Haslam's name appears in his visits book for Tuesday, 7th
August, the day of death, her name has been crossed out.
Mr Haslam says that his mother was 'more or less asleep' all that day. He does not believe that Shipman visited that day. His sister sat with their mother all day and did not mention any visit. During the night, she woke Mr Haslam and said that their mother had died. Again, there was no mention of a visit by Shipman. He was, however, called out after the death.
Certification
The counterfoil to the MCCD, completed by Shipman, confirms that he last saw Mrs Haslam alive on 6th
August 1984, the day before her death. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 7th
August 1984 and Shipman confirmed that he had seen Mrs Haslam's body after death.
The death certificate confirms that Mrs Jones was the informant in relation to the death and was present at the moment of the death.
Conclusion
I am sure that Mrs Haslam was very poorly in the days leading up to her death and that it is most probable that she was suffering the terminal stages of cancer. The only real bases for any suspicion are that she was being treated by Shipman and that he was treating her with morphine. The possibility that he administered a lethal dose of diamorphine or morphine can be discounted because of the interval between his last visit and the time of death. The possibility that he may have given a sub-lethal dose, intending to render Mrs Haslam more vulnerable to the effects of her disease and any possible secondary bronchopneumonia, cannot be discounted. However, taking into account that the progression of her illness is exactly as would normally be expected, I believe that this was very probably a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001