The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Samuel Harrison
Introduction
Mr Samuel Harrison died at his home, 162 Lodge Lane, Newton, Hyde on Saturday, 9th
January 1982 at the age of 87. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was cardiogenic shock due to coronary thrombosis.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Barbara Green (Mr Harrison's daughter), Mrs Vivien Taylor (Mr Harrison's friend and neighbour) and Mrs Carol Morrison (Mr Harrison's home help). All three witnesses gave evidence at an oral hearing on 12th
April 2002.
The Inquiry has had access to the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and Shipman's visits book for 1982. Mr Harrison's medical records have not survived and the district nursing records for this period have been destroyed.
Personal Background
Mr Harrison was a widower and lived alone. In 1977, he underwent prostate surgery which was successful. In about 1978, he was found to have cancer of the ear. His left ear was surgically removed. He still had pain from the ear and this continued until his death. It is not clear whether or not this was due to a spread of the cancer.
Mr Harrison was able to live independently, although he had a home help who came in every weekday, and his daughter, Mrs Green, visited him most days.
About two or three years before his death, Mr Harrison's bed was moved downstairs and he lived on the ground floor of his house. According to Mrs Green this was not because he could not manage the stairs but because he preferred to live in the warmest room in the house. On two or three occasions he stayed for a short period in a residential home. Mrs Green thinks that this may have been to give her some respite. The last time this happened was over the Christmas period of 1981. Mrs Green visited him each day. He returned to his own home on 2nd
or 3rd
January 1982. His condition had not changed and his usual regime was resumed. The home help visited, some of his meals were delivered by meals on wheels and the district nurse came to administer injections. Mrs Green says that the injections were to help Mr Harrison to sleep. As the nursing and medical records are not available, it is not known what the injections were.
Mrs Taylor lived opposite Mr Harrison and befriended him in the last year of his life. She used to visit him every evening when she came home from work. He was mentally alert and enjoyed company. She says that he often used to ask her to telephone the surgery to ask the doctor for a visit. She says that sometimes the surgery staff would remark on the frequency with which he asked for a visit. Shipman's visits book shows that he visited Mr Harrison seven times in the last six months before he died. Mrs Taylor says she did not notice any significant change in Mr Harrison's health until the night before his death.
Mrs Morrison's evidence was to some extent in conflict with that of Mrs Green and Mrs Taylor. In her written statement, she said that it was her recollection that Mr Harrison was extremely ill shortly before his death, to the extent that he required 24 hour care, which was provided by a team of day and night sitters. Both Mrs Green and Mrs Taylor say that that was not the case. When Mrs Green came to give her oral evidence, she acknowledged that she might have been mistaken about some aspects of her written evidence. She reminded me that the events of which we were speaking had occurred 20 years ago. I accept Mrs Morrison as an honest and sensible witness, doing her best to remember the death of Mr Harrison. I do not think she has confused him with one of her other clients. However, it may be that some details of her evidence are not correct.
In her oral evidence, Mrs Morrison said that Mr Harrison had deteriorated before his death and, although she might be wrong about him having 24 hour care, she still thought that he had more support than just a home help. She said that she herself had fallen into the habit of calling on him most days on her way home from her other clients' houses, as he lived on her way home. Her employers encouraged this practice with clients who were unwell.
Mr Harrison's name appears in Shipman's visits book only twice in the six week period before his death. One was on Christmas Eve and the other was on Thursday, 7th
January 1982. The visits book gives no clue as to the reason for the visit. Mrs Green does not remember a visit on that day.
The Evening before the Death
Mrs Green says that she spent much of the day with her father on 8th
January. She says that he was no worse than usual. She recalls that Mrs Taylor visited, as usual, in the evening. She remembers that during the evening her father either went to bed or lay on the bed. He did not get undressed. She does not remember him falling asleep. She stayed until quite late, as she had to wait for the district nurse to visit to give her father his injection. Mrs Taylor had gone by the time Mrs Green went home.
Mrs Taylor recalls that evening as being quite unlike any other evening she had spent with Mr Harrison. Mrs Green was still there, which was unusual; she had usually gone home by the time Mrs Taylor arrived. Mr Harrison was not well. At some stage during the evening he got into bed. This was unusual, as Mrs Taylor had never seen him in bed and 'off colour' before. She does not recall him getting undressed. He went to sleep and she remembers that he was jerking or twitching. She thought he might be having a heart attack. This continued for a while and then stopped. Mrs Green said she would not call the doctor that night as the doctor was coming in the morning. Mrs Green says that she does not remember having asked for the doctor to come the next day, although she says it is possible that she had done. I think it is more likely that Shipman had said that he would call again on Saturday morning when he visited on the Thursday. Mrs Taylor says that she stayed until about 11pm. Mrs Green was still there, waiting until the district nurse had been. Mrs Taylor says that before she left, Mrs Green gave her the key to Mr Harrison's house and asked her to come over early in the morning in case the doctor arrived. Mrs Green does not remember doing this.
The Day of the Death
The three witnesses gave accounts of the events of the morning of Saturday, 9th
January which are irreconcilably different.
Mrs Taylor says that she looked out of her window at about 7.45am and saw that Mr Harrison's curtains had been opened. She went across shortly afterwards and found him up and dressed and sitting at the table drinking a cup of tea which he had made for himself. He was wearing the same clothes as he had been wearing the night before. She thinks he might have stayed in them overnight. He was quite well and talking quite sensibly. She offered to get him a cigarette but he said he would wait until after the doctor had been. He knew that Shipman was coming that morning. He thought that Shipman did not know that he still smoked.
Mrs Taylor says that Shipman arrived at about 8.30am or 8.45am. He went to Mr Harrison, who was sitting on a hard-backed dining chair. He listened to his heart and chest, using a stethoscope, but did not take his blood pressure. Then he said to Mrs Taylor that Mr Harrison had had a heart attack. Mrs Taylor thinks she might have said that she thought he had had one. She says that she asked Shipman whether he was going to admit Mr Harrison to hospital. Shipman said that the hospital would not accept him. He added that he did not think that Mr Harrison would get the care he needed at home.
Then Shipman said to Mr Harrison, 'Right Sam, get on the bed and I'll give you an injection.' Mr Harrison got on the bed. Shipman took two phials or ampoules out of his bag and asked Mrs Taylor to warm them, as it was a very cold day. She warmed them by rolling them in her hands by the fire. They were different. Both contained liquid; one was a dark colour. Then Shipman put the contents into a syringe and asked Mrs Taylor to hold Mr Harrison's left arm while he injected him. Mr Harrison's bed was against the wall so that his right arm was next to the wall. Mrs Taylor held Mr Harrison's arm, above and below the elbow and Shipman injected him in the vein in the crook of the elbow. As he was doing this, Shipman said, 'This will either bring him round or...'. He did not finish his sentence. Mrs Taylor says she was puzzled, as Mr Harrison did not need to be brought round; he was quite conscious at the time of the injection. However, she says that as soon as the injection had been given, Mr Harrison went stiff and a funny grey colour. He was only stiff for a short time, then he became peaceful as if in a coma. He was still breathing and his colour returned to normal. The next thing Mrs Taylor recalls is that Shipman said he would call a nurse to clean him up. He did not say anything about Mr Harrison dying. However, in her written statement Mrs Taylor said that at this stage Shipman said, 'He has gone' or 'He is going', Mrs Taylor was not sure which.
Mrs Taylor says that Shipman left the house for a short time and soon afterwards a district nurse arrived. She assumes that he must have used a car phone or had been to a public call box. Mr Harrison did not have a telephone. Mrs Taylor recalls that the next person to arrive was Mr Harrison's sister Cilla, who was aged about 90. Soon after, Mrs Green arrived. This was at about 10am and Shipman was just leaving. She believes that Mr Harrison was dead by then. She herself was very upset and was crying. When she went home, her husband was there. He was a driving instructor and his 10am lesson had been cancelled. Mrs Taylor says that later that day Mrs Green came over to her house and she told Mrs Green about the injection. Mrs Green said that she would not have let Shipman give the injection. Mrs Taylor felt that Mr Harrison had been 'put down like a dog'. She told everyone about it at the time, because she was so upset about what had happened. She did not make an official complaint, as it was not up to her; she was not related to Mr Harrison. When she learned about Shipman's arrest and convictions and later heard about the Inquiry, she still did not come forward with her concerns. She spoke to a relative who used to work for Shipman and she said that Mrs Taylor must not make a complaint as everyone thought that Shipman was wonderful and in any case she had heard that the police did not need any more witnesses.
Mrs Green's recollection is different. She recalls walking to her father's house that morning and collecting some items of shopping for him on the way. When she arrived at the house, Mrs Taylor, Shipman and Mr Harrison's sister Cilla were present. Shipman was by the bed. Her father was on the bed and wearing day clothes. On further reflection she said she was not sure whether he was on the bed or inside it. When he was dying, later, she could only remember seeing his face, not his body. Mrs Green asked what had happened. Shipman said, 'He should have gone by now. Ring me when he has gone'. He then left. He was only there for about five minutes after she arrived. Mrs Green says that Mrs Taylor then told her that Shipman had given her father an injection and had asked her to hold Mr Harrison's arm while he did it. Mrs Green says that her father was still alive at this stage. She was upset and as a means of distraction, went outside and started to clear snow from the path. The next thing she recalls is that the district nurse arrived. This was a different nurse from the one who had attended the night before. Mrs Green went indoors with the nurse but does not recall seeing her attend to her father. When she went back inside, her father started to make what she describes as 'a horrible noise'. She has some recollection that Mrs Morrison was at the house but says that she was not working there; she had popped in and she seemed to be coming and going. All this time, Cilla was sitting in the living room. She was deaf and Mrs Green thinks that she did not know what was going on. Mrs Green, herself, was in the kitchen part of the time. At some time around noon or a little later, Cilla said she was hungry and Mrs Green went to a chip shop for some lunch. When she left, her father was still alive. She was away about 20 minutes. When she returned, her father had either just died or was dying as she arrived. Her recollection is that her father lived for about two hours after Shipman's departure. Mrs Green then telephoned Shipman's surgery and a different doctor called at the house to certify the fact of death.
Mrs Morrison's account of events differs significantly from those given by both Mrs Taylor and Mrs Green. She remembers calling at the house at about 9am on Saturday, 9th
January. She did not normally work on Saturdays but, because Mr Harrison was so unwell, she had agreed to work overtime. She was able to walk in as the door was not locked. Only Mr Harrison was there when she arrived. He was in bed. He was very ill; he could not speak and was a dreadful colour. There was no sign that he had been up and about. In her written evidence Mrs Morrison said that she found a note which she said had been left by the night sitter explaining that the doctor had been called, as Mr Harrison had deteriorated. In oral evidence, Mrs Morrison accepted that she might be mistaken about Mr Harrison having a night sitter. However, I think it is possible that a note had been left for her by the district nurse who had called late the previous evening.
Mrs Morrison remembers that Mrs Green and Mr Harrison's sister Cilla arrived at the house. They went into the kitchen to make a cup of tea. She does not recall the presence of a neighbour. While Mrs Green and Cilla were in the kitchen, a doctor arrived. In her written statement Mrs Morrison said that it was Shipman, but in her oral evidence she said she was not sure that it was. It was definitely a man. He asked her if she was afraid of death, which she thought was odd but she said she was not. In her written statement, she said that she believed Shipman then gave Mr Harrison an injection, although she could not see what he was doing, as his back was towards her. In her oral evidence, she stressed that she really did not know whether he had given an injection or not. She had certainly not seen a syringe. In any event, Shipman left soon afterwards. She remained with Mr Harrison, holding his hand which was very cold. After a while, she cannot say how long, she felt his hand go limp and realised that he had died. She called Mrs Green and Cilla, who were still in the kitchen, and they came into the living room. In her written statement, Mrs Morrison said that all three of them were crying but there was also a sense of relief because Mr Harrison had been so ill. After a while, Mrs Morrison asked if there was anything further she could do to help and Mrs Green said there was not, so she went home. This was at about noon. On her account, she was there continuously from first thing in the morning until after the death and she never saw Mrs Taylor.
Certification
According to the death certificate, Mrs Green was present at her father's death. As she was the informant who registered the death, it seems likely that she told the registrar that she had been present.
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. Shipman said that Mr Harrison had died at home on 9th
January of cardiogenic shock due to a coronary thrombosis. It is not possible to decipher what he wrote about the contribution of Mr Harrison's ear cancer, but the registrar understood Shipman to have certified that basal cell carcinoma of the left inner ear had contributed to the death. Shipman said that he had last seen Mr Harrison alive on the day of his death. He said that there would not be a post-mortem examination. He had seen the body after death. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 11th
January 1982.
The Aftermath
Mrs Green says that she called to see Shipman a few days after her father's death. She says that she strongly suspected that Shipman had killed her father by giving him an injection. She says that she kept stressing to Shipman that her father had had great faith in him. The message she was trying to convey was that Shipman had breached her father's trust. However she did not say that. She recalls Shipman saying, 'I don't carry anything like that around with me'. She cannot remember what led to Shipman saying that and did not ask him what he meant.
When asked why she had not come forward with her concerns about her father's death when she heard of Shipman's crimes, she said that she was afraid to do so. She had not seen anything with her own eyes and she felt she might get into trouble if she spoke about things that she had not seen.
Conclusion
I regret I am unable to reach a positive conclusion about this case.
I am inclined to the view that Mrs Morrison is probably right in her recollection that Mr Harrison was really quite ill, at least for a short time before his death. I do not think that the district nurses would have been attending, as it appears they probably were, twice a day, unless there was something seriously amiss. I do not accept Mrs Green's explanation that they only came once a day, late at night, for the sole purpose of giving an injection to help Mr Harrison to sleep. That would not account for the arrival of the district nurse on the Saturday morning. I do not accept Mrs Taylor's suggestion that Shipman arranged the nurse's attendance that morning by telephone. I think the district nurse arrived as a matter of routine.
I also accept Mrs Morrison's account of how she came to be present on the Saturday morning. I think she was working overtime because Mr Harrison was ill. I do not accept that she 'popped in' or was 'coming and going' as Mrs Green suggested. I think she was there throughout. As I think she is honest and that she would have remembered Mrs Taylor if she had been there, I am doubtful as to whether Mrs Taylor was there that morning at all.
There are at least two other reasons why I am doubtful about Mrs Taylor's evidence. Mrs Taylor claims that Shipman arrived at about 8.30am or 8.45am. I know that it was Shipman's practice to hold a short surgery on Saturday mornings from about 8.30am until 10am. He would only have gone out on a visit in an emergency. I have the impression that this was not an emergency and that Shipman probably arrived some time after 10am. I am satisfied that it was he and not any other doctor. He said on the MCCD counterfoil that he had seen Mr Harrison alive on the day of the death.
Mrs Taylor gave a graphic account of Shipman giving an intravenous injection into Mr Harrison's left arm. Although her account was very detailed, I am doubtful that it occurred. I felt her account was too colourful and too dramatic to be true. If she had really witnessed and been a part of this event, I am quite sure she would have told the police all she knew as soon as the news about Shipman broke. She never did so and has advanced her story only when approached by the Inquiry.
Mrs Taylor and Mrs Green have advanced a similar account about the giving of the injection. Mrs Green says she was not there but was told about it that day. These two witnesses gave very different accounts of the sequence of events. Mrs Taylor says that Mr Harrison went stiff and grey and then fell into a coma. She says she believes he was dead by about 10am. As the injection she says she witnessed was given intravenously before 9am, it could not have been a lethal injection. Mr Harrison would have been dead within minutes if he had had a lethal injection. Mrs Green says that her father died at about 1pm, which would have been about four hours after the injection, if one was given in the circumstances described by Mrs Taylor. If he lived until 1pm, his death cannot have been caused or contributed to by the injection given before 9am.
The only witness who gives an account which could possibly lead to the conclusion that Shipman was unlawfully involved in this death is Mrs Morrison. She is not sure that an injection was given. If it was, she does not know what the injection was or how it was given. It might have been given intravenously or intramuscularly. She has the impression that Mr Harrison died quite soon after Shipman's visit, before Mrs Green and Cilla had returned from the kitchen. On her account some suspicion arises that Shipman might have hastened Mr Harrison's death.
I am unable to reach any definite conclusion. I say only that there are some grounds to suspect that Shipman might have hastened the death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001