The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Gladys Heapey
Introduction
Mrs Gladys Heapey died at her home, 15 Acorn Avenue, Hyde on Friday, 27th
January 1984 at the age of 69. She was a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In September 2001, Mr Brian Chapman Heapey, Mrs Heapey's only son, responded to a newspaper advertisement seeking further information about a number of deaths, including that of his mother. He expressed concern about the circumstances of the death and provided a statement of evidence. Mr Heapey has also provided a statement and given oral evidence in connection with the death of his father, Mr Clifford Barnes Heapey, who died in 1995.
There has been no police investigation into Mrs Heapey's death and no inquest has been held.
The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1984, the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Mrs Heapey's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Brian Heapey says that his mother was a very active woman who never showed any sign of tiredness, even in the days before her death. She would regularly walk into Hyde town centre and would also walk to his house, a journey which entailed a strenuous uphill section. However, Mr Heapey also recalls that his mother had been a cigarette smoker and that Shipman had diagnosed her as suffering from angina, although he does not recall her ever complaining of chest pain or shortness of breath. Mr Heapey says that his mother had never had a heart attack or any other serious incident or condition related to her heart, prior to the day of her death.
Mrs Heapey's normal daily routine would be to make breakfast for herself and her husband, before doing the housework. Usually, her husband would go out for a walk while she did that. They would then have lunch together. In the afternoon, they would either go shopping in Hyde or do some gardening. There was no indication that Mrs Heapey was unwell in the days leading up to her death.
The Day of the Death
There was a heavy fall of snow on the night of 26th
to 27th
January 1984. On the morning of 27th
January, Mr Brian Heapey telephoned his parents to say that he would come round later to clear their path. However, Mrs Heapey decided to clear the path herself, which would have been a very strenuous task.
Some time later that day (Mr Brian Heapey cannot recall the precise time), he received a telephone call from his father to say that he thought Mrs Heapey had died. Mr Brian Heapey went to his parents' home immediately and found his mother, in the front room, sitting upright in her chair. He thinks that her eyes were still open. He spoke to her but there was no response. Nor could he find a pulse. He telephoned the Donneybrook Surgery to ask for Shipman to come.
Shipman arrived within about five to ten minutes. Shipman pronounced Mrs Heapey dead and said that her heart had just stopped beating. He also issued Mr Brian Heapey with a document, which was probably the MCCD.
Mrs Heapey's name appears in Shipman's visits book for 27th
January. It is not clear whether this entry relates to the visit made when Shipman certified the cause of death. My impression is that Shipman usually entered names in his visits book before leaving the surgery to go out on his rounds. He did not usually enter the names of patients in the book where the request had been made at a later stage in the day. If a request were made for him to examine a patient who was believed to be dead, he would sometimes write the sign of a cross against the name.
Mr Brian Heapey does not recall any conversation with his father about the circumstances of his mother's death. He does not know how it came about that Mr Heapey found his wife dead. Nor does he know whether Shipman visited his mother that day. Certainly, he does not recall his father telling him that Shipman had been at the house.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman recorded that Mrs Heapey had died as the result of a coronary thrombosis, due to ischaemic heart disease. He said that he had last seen Mrs Heapey alive on 6th
January 1984. Mrs Heapey's name does not appear in the visits book for that day but it is quite possible that Mrs Heapey had seen him at the surgery. The Donneybrook appointments sheets have not survived. Shipman also said that he seen the body after death. He said that there would be no post-mortem examination.
Mrs Heapey was cremated but the cremation documents have not survived.
Conclusion
It appears that Mrs Heapey suffered from angina, although her son does not recall her ever complaining of symptoms. If she did, she would have been at an increased risk of suffering a heart attack. Mrs Heapey was apparently well during the days before her death but it seems that she undertook some strenuous activity on the day she died and this might well have put a strain on her heart. It is therefore quite possible, even likely, that Mrs Heapey died a natural death from the cause certified by Shipman.
There are, however, some significant gaps in the evidence. First, we have no account of the death itself. If Mr Heapey had been present when his wife had a heart attack, I would expect him to tell his son about it and I would expect the son to have some recollection of the account. It seems possible, therefore, that Mr Heapey was not present at the time of the death, and found Mrs Heapey dead in her chair. That seems consistent with Mr Brian Heapey's recollection that his father telephoned to say that he thought Mrs Heapey had died. If that is what happened, and Mr Heapey was out of the house at the time of the death, there is a possibility that Shipman had visited during his absence. Mrs Heapey's name is in the visits book and, although it might have been entered after her death, it is also quite possible that the entry reflects Shipman's intention to visit on his rounds. On the other hand, if Shipman had visited Mrs Heapey when she was still alive, I would have expected her husband to mention it.
The fact that Mrs Heapey may have been found dead sitting in her chair excites a degree of concern. In his generic evidence, Dr John Grenville says that a patient who has died of a heart attack is not usually found sitting in a chair. He or she is more likely to be found collapsed in circumstances which suggest an attempt to call for help. On the other hand, I have already noted the very real possibility that Mrs Heapey died a natural death.
I am afraid I am unable to decide whether Mrs Heapey died a natural death or whether she was killed by Shipman.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001