The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Charles Harris
Introduction
Mr Charles Harris died at his home, 51 Corporation Street, Hyde on Friday, 23rd
November 1984 at the age of 70. He was a patient of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was bronchopneumonia.
The only information initially available to the Inquiry about the death was the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), which named Mrs Marilyn Schofield, Mr Harris' daughter, as the informant. The Inquiry has traced and taken a statement from Mrs Schofield. The Inquiry has also had access to the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and Shipman's visits book for 1984. Mr Harris' medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Harris worked in a factory until his retirement at the age of 65. He smoked heavily and was prone to chest infections. A few years before Mr Harris' death, he and Mrs Schofield quarrelled and did not speak to each other again.
Although Mrs Schofield was not in direct contact with her father, she received news of him from a woman friend of his, who visited him from time to time. Mrs Schofield cannot recall the name of this friend. Mrs Schofield heard that her father had lost a lot of weight and had been admitted to hospital. Mrs Schofield is unsure but thinks that the friend may have mentioned that her father had cancer.
The Day of the Death
At about 5pm on 23rd
November 1984, Mr Harris' friend called at Mrs Schofield's house to tell her that her father had died. Mrs Schofield went to her father's house where she found his body, sitting on the sofa, dressed in day clothes. The friend explained that she had found Mr Harris but Mrs Schofield is unsure whether, when the friend found him, Mr Harris had been alive or dead. The friend also said that she had called for Shipman, but Mrs Schofield is unsure whether the friend said that Shipman had seen Mr Harris before or after his death.
Mr Harris' name appears in Shipman's visits book for Friday, 23rd
November. Alongside his name appears the number
'1'
. That indicates that Shipman intended to visit Mr Harris as his first visit that day. The names of eight other patients appear in the visits book for that day. Although it is unclear whether Mr Harris had died at the time that the visit was requested on Friday, 23rd
November, the fact that the number
'1'
appears alongside his name suggests that Shipman copied his name from the surgery visits book at the end of morning surgery that day. Mr Harris' name also appears in Shipman's visits book for Thursday, 22nd
November. Alongside his name appear the letters
'FRI'
which almost certainly indicates an intention on Shipman's part to visit the following day, that is on Friday, the day of the death. Although Mrs Schofield cannot recall whether she was told that Shipman had been at her father's house on the day of the death, it seems likely that Shipman himself had planned a visit and did not merely call to examine the body after it had been found.
The Aftermath
On 24th
November 1984, the day after Mr Harris' death, Mrs Schofield went to Shipman's surgery in order to collect the MCCD. While at the surgery, Shipman asked Mrs Schofield whether she knew that Mr Harris had had cancer. He said that, if she agreed that a post-mortem examination was not necessary, there would be no need for one. She agreed that one was not necessary.
Certification
The MCCD has not survived, but the counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman did not record on the MCCD counterfoil when he had last seen Mr Harris alive. He said that a post-mortem examination would not take place and that he had seen the body after death. The cause of death is given as bronchopneumonia. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 24th
November 1984.
Conclusion
There is no direct witness evidence as to the circumstances of Mr Harris' death. Mrs Schofield's hearsay account is extremely vague. There is a suggestion that Mr Harris was suffering from cancer, but it does not appear that he had yet reached the terminal phase. He was up and dressed at the time of his death. Shipman did not certify that the death was due to cancer.
It would appear that Shipman visited Mr Harris on the day before he died. It is reasonable to infer that Mr Harris was unwell that day and that Shipman decided to visit again the following day. However, it does not appear that Mr Harris' condition on 22nd
November gave rise to any need for him to be admitted to hospital. If Mr Harris was suffering from a chest infection of such severity that he was to die of bronchopneumonia the following day, one might have expected him to be admitted to hospital, especially as he lived alone and had no full-time carer. I do, therefore, find myself somewhat suspicious that Mr Harris should have been found dead the following day, sitting on a sofa, fully dressed. In his generic evidence to the Inquiry, Dr John Grenville said:
'Patients dying of bronchopneumonia are usually weak and become exhausted. They usually lapse into unconsciousness and the respiration becomes increasingly rattly.
It follows from the description of bronchopneumonia and lobar pneumonia that it is inconsistent for a patient dying of these conditions to be found sitting in a chair looking peaceful and appearing to be asleep'
.
In my view, that Mr Harris was found sitting on the sofa dressed in day clothes, is inconsistent with a death from bronchopneumonia. If it had been from bronchopneumonia, I doubt that he would have got up and dressed himself.
A further cause for suspicion arises from Shipman's reported conversation with Mrs Schofield about the need for a post-mortem examination. The decision as to whether there will be a post-mortem is for the coroner. It is the doctor's duty to decide whether he or she ought to refer the case to the coroner if he or she is insufficiently sure of the cause of death to sign the MCCD. It is not a matter for the relatives to decide. I have come across many cases in which Shipman has suggested to relatives that it is for them to say whether there will be post-mortem examination. Most relatives, given an apparent choice, will say that they do not want a post-mortem. In this way, Shipman creates the impression that it is not he who has sought to avoid referral to the coroner. He creates the impression that he is being considerate of the family's wishes. I regard this as quite sinister.
I have real suspicions that Shipman might have killed Mr Harris. However, bearing in mind the lack of evidence about the circumstances, I do not feel able to decide whether the death was natural or was caused by Shipman.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001