The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ellen Hennefer
Introduction
Mrs Ellen Hennefer died at Norbury House, a residential home for the elderly, Great Norbury Street, Hyde on Thursday, 1st
December 1988 at the age of 91. She had probably been a patient of Shipman for about six months. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was old age.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Gwyneth Spencer, Mrs Hennefer's niece, and from Mrs Julia Anne Mackie, the proprietor of Norbury House. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1988, the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), the cremation documentation and the Norbury House register of residents. Mrs Hennefer's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Spencer says that her aunt had enjoyed excellent health for many years but that, shortly before she moved to Norbury House, she became rather frail. Her mobility was restricted and she needed help with bathing. She used to complain that she was tired and had 'had enough' of life. Mrs Hennefer moved to Norbury House on 23rd
June 1988. The register of residents reveals that her general practitioner at that time was Dr Umiller, whose surgery was in Stalybridge. Mrs Mackie arranged for Mrs Hennefer to be transferred to a general practitioner at the Donneybrook Surgery, as was usual for residents of Norbury House. At the time of her admission, Mrs Hennefer was described as
'a lovely old lady'
. She had a history of falls and had been admitted to hospital for that reason.
During the months before her death, Mrs Hennefer began to suffer from dementia. Her legs became ulcerated. She relied on a walking frame and continued to complain of feeling tired. Her appetite was poor and she had to be encouraged to take fluids.
Mrs Hennefer's name appears in Shipman's visits book on 22nd
November 1988 but does not appear on any subsequent day.
The Day of the Death
The register of residents contains the following brief entry recording the death:
'DIED 1-12.88. 5.45pm'
.
Mrs Mackie cannot remember the circumstances of Mrs Hennefer's death, although she thinks that she was probably semi-conscious for some days. She surmises that Mrs Hennefer was probably found dead during one of the routine checks which were carried out every ten minutes or so. She does not remember Shipman ever giving Mrs Hennefer an injection. In her generic evidence, Mrs Mackie said that a general practitioner could not gain entry to the home without notifying staff and that, normally, a care attendant would be present during a doctor's consultation.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman recorded that Mrs Hennefer died of old age on 1st
December 1988 and that he had last seen her on 28th
November. He indicated that Dr Napier had seen the body after death and said that there would not be a post-mortem examination.
Mrs Spencer applied for permission to cremate the body and signed cremation Form A. The time of death is recorded as 7.30pm. This might well have been the time at which the death was confirmed by Dr Napier.
Shipman completed cremation Form B and recorded that Mrs Hennefer's death occurred at 5.45pm on 1st
December 1988. He said that he had attended Mrs Hennefer during her last illness for a period of two months and that he last saw her alive three days before her death, on 28th
November 1988. He said that the cause of death was old age and that the mode of death was a coma lasting four to five days. Shipman said that his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and on statements made by staff at Norbury House. He said that the staff at the home were present at the moment of death.
Mrs Mackie says that, although Mrs Hennefer was passing in and out of consciousness during the last few days of her life, she does not believe that she was in a coma for four to five days before her death.
The Expert Evidence
On consideration of the cremation documentation, Professor Richard Baker did not think this death was suspicious.
Conclusion
It appears to me that Mrs Hennefer very probably died as the result of natural causes.
The evidence shows that Mrs Hennefer declined gradually before her death, so that when the time came, her death was not unexpected.
Shipman claimed that he last saw Mrs Hennefer three days before her death. There is no evidence to suggest that he visited her after that. As the medical records and nursing notes are not available, I cannot say with certainty that Shipman did not visit Mrs Hennefer on one or more later occasions. If he did, it is possible that he might have done something to hasten her death. However, there is no evidence that he did.
In these circumstances, it seems highly likely that the death was natural.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001