The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Clara Hackney
Introduction
Miss Clara Hackney died at her home, 6 Farm Lane, Hyde on Friday, 21st
September 1990 at the age of about 84. It is not known whether she had been registered as a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was congestive heart failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Margaret Swindells (Miss Hackney's niece) and Mrs Judy Grant, a home help employed by Tameside Social Services at the time of Miss Hackney's death. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1990 and to the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book. Miss Hackney's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Hackney never married although she had a son called Mr Derek Hackney. They lived together until he died shortly before her death. She worked as a cotton operator until her retirement at the age of 60.
Miss Hackney enjoyed good health, although she did smoke cigarettes. A few months before her death she fell down the stairs at home and was taken to Tameside General Hospital by ambulance. It appears that she was not seriously injured but it was discovered that she was suffering from a heart condition. She was transferred to Shire Hill Hospital in Glossop, where she remained for several months. While she was there, her son was found to be suffering from cancer and died. Miss Hackney was naturally very affected by his death.
Some time later, Miss Hackney was discharged from hospital and was able to live at home with the assistance of her family and professional carers. As a matter of routine a home help would call each morning and Miss Hackney's lunch would be delivered by the meals on wheels service. In addition, Mrs Swindells would call each evening and help her aunt get prepared for bed. Mrs Swindells would stay at the house until about 9pm.
Mrs Swindells remembers that on the night before her aunt died she seemed rather weak, but Mrs Swindells was not unduly troubled by this and thought that her aunt was simply having an 'off day'.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Grant was deputising for a colleague and remembers calling at Miss Hackney's home on the morning of 21st
September 1990. Some time between 8am and 9am she let herself into the house with her key. She found Miss Hackney in bed, slumped to one side with her upper body hanging out of the bed. Her face was ashen. She was wearing a nightdress. Mrs Grant thought Miss Hackney had died but did not touch her. She telephoned Tameside Social Services to report what she had found and in due course the police arrived.
Someone must have informed Mrs Swindells about the death, as she remembers receiving a telephone call. She went to her aunt's house and arrived between 9am and 10am. Mrs Grant was still present. Miss Hackney's body was still in the bed. Mrs Swindells' recollection is different from Mrs Grant's. She recalls that her aunt looked as though she were asleep. Shipman called at the house, presumably to see the body, but Mrs Swindells cannot remember what was said.
Miss Hackney's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for the day of her death or the previous day. According to the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book, Dr Moysey was on out of hours duty on the evening of 20th
September and handed over to the deputising service at 11.15pm. If Miss Hackney had requested a visit after Mrs Swindells had left at 9pm, either Dr Moysey or the deputising doctor would have answered the call and it is most unlikely that Shipman would have attended.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not survived, but its counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman recorded that he had last seen Miss Hackney alive on 28th
August 1990, although her name does not appear in his visits book for that date. The visits book suggests that Shipman was off work that day and the page is otherwise blank. On the counterfoil, Shipman said that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 21st
September 1990, the day of Miss Hackney's death.
Conclusion
I am satisfied that Miss Hackney died of natural causes.
Very little is known about Miss Hackney's health in the period before her death. However, it appears that she was known to have some sort of heart condition and was generally rather frail. She was able to cope at home only because she had such excellent support. Although her death appeared quite sudden to Mrs Swindells, I do not think it was wholly unexpected.
Miss Hackney was alive when Mrs Swindells left the house at about 9pm on 20th
September 1990. She was discovered dead in bed, early the following morning. It is extremely unlikely that Shipman would have visited her during that time. Had she requested a visit after Mrs Swindells left, which is most unlikely in itself, it would not have been Shipman who attended. There is no reason to suspect that Shipman was in any way involved in Miss Hackney's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001