The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Ada Hardacre
Introduction
Mrs Ada Hardacre died on Ward 6, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Thursday, 3rd
December 1970 at the age of 85. She had been transferred there from Headlands Hospital on Monday, 30th
November 1970. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was acute peritonitis due to right pyonephrosis. At the time of Mrs Hardacre’s death, Shipman was a house officer in surgery.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr John Hardacre and Mr Norman Hardacre, Mrs Hardacre’s grandsons. Mr John Hardacre was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’). Statements have also been taken from Mrs Irene Torrible (formerly Miss Irene Dawes) and Mrs Ivy Vause who were respectively a nursing sister on Ward 6 and a night nurse at PGI at the time of Mrs Hardacre’s admission. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Hardacre’s hospital records, which include the report of the post-mortem examination that was performed on her body. The PGI mortuary post-mortem book, which contains brief details of each case in which a post-mortem examination was performed, was provided to the Inquiry. Mrs Hardacre’s body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F.
Professor Richard Baker has considered and commented on the available documents.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mrs Hardacre’s husband was killed during the First World War and she never re-married. She enjoyed good health until the year of her death. She lived alone for most of her life but moved to live with her son (Mr John Hardacre’s father) and his family when she was in her mid-60s. About four years later, she moved into a residential home. Mr John Hardacre and his father visited her regularly in the home until Mr John Hardacre’s father died, about three months before Mrs Hardacre’s death. The death had a considerable emotional impact upon Mrs Hardacre; she had always been extremely close to her son.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
Mr John Hardacre remembers that, about ten days before his grandmother died, the family was informed that she had a serious problem with her left foot, which had apparently become infected. He remembers that his grandmother had kept quiet about the problem for some time because she was worried that, if she were to be admitted to hospital, she would lose her place in the residential home. He remembers that she was eventually admitted to PGI for an above-knee amputation of her left leg. He remembers that this was performed soon after her admission. After her operation, she was transferred to Headlands Hospital, which was an annexe of PGI that treated geriatric patients. Mr John Hardacre visited his grandmother there during the evening of the day before her death, which would have been Wednesday, 2nd
December 1970. The hospital records confirm the essential parts of Mr John Hardacre’s evidence, although there are discrepancies concerning timings and, in particular, the time of admission to Headlands Hospital. That such discrepancies should exist is hardly surprising, given the passage of time since Mrs Hardacre’s death.
It appears from the medical notes that Mrs Hardacre was first admitted to PGI for her operation on 12th
September 1970. The relevant note confirms that the fourth and fifth toes on her left foot and the adjacent area of foot were gangrenous. However, it appears that she declined to undergo amputation and she was admitted instead to Headlands Hospital. On 2nd
October 1970, a locum medical assistant at Headlands Hospital wrote to Mr Patrick Anderson, consultant surgeon at PGI, explaining that Mrs Hardacre was complaining of frequent and severe pain in her left lower leg and was now requesting amputation. It appears from the medical notes that she was seen on 6th
October 1970, when arrangements were made for her admission, as soon as possible, for amputation.
That admission took place on 7th
November 1970. Shipman made the admission note. The operation was carried out two days later. Correspondence suggests that Mrs Hardacre’s post-operative course was uneventful and that she returned to Headlands Hospital on 26th
November 1970. However, four days later, on 30th
November 1970, she was readmitted to PGI with a history of pain in the right iliac fossa and vomiting. She looked unwell. She was thought to have an appendix mass and she was treated conservatively with fluids and antibiotics. Her general condition slowly deteriorated. The nursing record makes it clear that Mrs Hardacre was very poorly by this time. She was sleeping only for short periods and was very confused. She had pressure sores. Mr John Hardacre recollects being on the ward one night when, as he tried to prop up his grandmother in bed, she said that he was trying to kill her. She was obviously very confused.
The Day of the Death
Mr John Hardacre says that he definitely visited his grandmother on the evening before she died. He says that he had no inkling that there was anything wrong. He recollects that his grandmother did not give the impression that she was in any pain. He assumed that she was
‘on some kind of pain killer, probably morphine’
. He remembers that he had not expected his grandmother to be in hospital thereafter for longer than about two days. It will become clear that his recollection is inconsistent in this respect also with the hospital records which do not paint a picture of someone who was shortly to be discharged. I repeat that this is hardly surprising given the passage of time since the events under review.
The nursing record for 2nd
December 1970 indicates that Mrs Hardacre was very ill. She was given all nursing care but refused to take fluids. At about 10.20am, she was given 50mg pethidine, although the hospital records do not make clear by whom. Having read the nursing record, Mrs Vause observed that it appeared to her that Mrs Hardacre was in terrible pain and was probably dying. She said that 50mg pethidine would have been an appropriate dose. The medical note for 2nd
December 1970 confirms Mrs Hardacre’s poor condition.
Mrs Vause made the next and final entry in the nursing record. It reads as follows:
‘Appeared to be in pain 9-30pm
Very noisy & restless. Seen by Dr Shipman
(
illegible
)
Morphine 10mgs given 10pm. Condition
deteriorated rapidly. Patient became weaker and died 12-15AM.
Relatives not present but informed by Police.’
Mrs Vause does not remember Mrs Hardacre. She says that she would have come on duty at about 9pm that evening. She says that it appears that Shipman was called out to see Mrs Hardacre, either by herself or by another member of the night staff. She suggests that the letters
‘IV’
, indicating that the drug was given intravenously, appear in the note although I am not sure that she is correct about this. The microfiche record is unclear and does not allow me to be sure. It may be that the morphine was given intravenously, I do not know. What Mrs Vause says, and what is clearly correct, is that, since Mrs Hardacre was given morphine rather than pethidine, the impression must have been that she was in more pain than earlier. She thinks that the giving of morphine was appropriate and that 10mg would have been a normal dose to give. Shipman made no entry in the medical notes to confirm that the drug was given. There should have been an entry in the medical notes as the drug would have had to be given by a doctor if it was given intravenously, though not if given intramuscularly. Mrs Vause also states that the drug would have been given by Shipman.
The final entry in the medical notes was made by Shipman. He recorded that he had been called to see Mrs Hardacre after her death. He said that the time of death was
‘0015hrs’
. He made a note that the cause of death for the purposes of death certification was appendicitis and that another cause was amputation of the left leg. As I have mentioned, a post-mortem examination was performed on Mrs Hardacre’s body. There is a copy of the report of the consultant pathologist in the hospital records. This confirms the past amputation and reveals the presence of pus in the peritoneal cavity and in the right kidney. This report forms the basis of the causes of death stated on the death certificate.
Medical Evidence
Professor Baker has considered the hospital records and has expressed the view that there is no cause for concern about Shipman’s role.
Certification
Shipman completed cremation Form B. He stated that Mrs Hardacre died at
‘0015hrs’
on 3rd
December 1970. He said that he had attended her during her last illness for five days; in fact it was three days. He said that he had last seen her alive on 2nd
December 1970 and that he had seen her body five minutes after the death, when he had made a
‘complete’
examination of it. He said that the mode of death was coma lasting 2-3 hours. This was said to have been based on his own observation. He said that Sister Dawes had nursed Mrs Hardacre during her last illness. He said that no one was present at the moment of death.
Mrs Torrible has no recollection of Mrs Hardacre, which is not surprising given the time that has now elapsed. Dr Surinder Mohan Ahuja, a medical registrar at the hospital, completed Form C. He said that he had questioned Shipman and Sister Dawes about the death. Mrs Torrible has no recollection of being asked either about Mrs Hardacre’s death or indeed about the death of any other patient by a doctor who was completing a cremation Form C.
For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Conclusion
From the evidence of Mr John Hardacre and from the hospital records, I am quite satisfied that Mrs Hardacre developed a significant infection in her abdomen following her left above-knee amputation. I am also satisfied that her condition became very grave in the 24 hours before she died. She was in severe pain and it was appropriate that she should have been prescribed pethidine and morphine.
The only causes for concern in this case are that Shipman was the doctor who last saw Mrs Hardacre alive and that he administered morphine just a few hours before she died. It is recorded that Mrs Hardacre was given 10mg morphine, an entirely appropriate dose. It is most unlikely that Shipman gave more than that. He would not have been allowed unrestricted access to the controlled drugs cupboard and a record had to be kept of all controlled drugs used. Moreover, at this time, Shipman was not yet qualified as a doctor and was in his first six-month post as a junior house officer. It is likely that the nursing staff would have watched the giving of this injection with particular care. In any event, if Shipman had given a lethal overdose of morphine, Mrs Hardacre would have died far more quickly than she did. In the light of all the information before me, I am satisfied that Mrs Hardacre died a natural death. I think it almost inconceivable that Shipman would have had the confidence to give a lethal dose of morphine at this stage in his career.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001