The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
John Auty Harrison
Introduction
Mr John Auty Harrison died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Monday, 8th
May 1972 at the age of 70. It appears that he had been admitted to PGI earlier that day. Ward 1 was the female medical ward but men were sometimes nursed in the cubicles on Ward 1 if there was a shortage of accommodation on Ward 2. Shipman certified that the cause of death was acute bronchitis due to chronic bronchitis and emphysema. At the time of Mr Harrison’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
Mr Peter Harrison, Mr Harrison’s son, who is named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’), has since died. The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Barbara Woolley, Mr Harrison’s daughter. A statement was also taken from Mrs Linda Byford, who was at the time a junior nursing sister on Ward 1. Mr Harrison’s hospital records are no longer available. Mr Harrison’s body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to the cremation Forms A, B, C and F. No post-mortem examination was performed.
Mrs Woolley is doubtful about the accuracy of some of the information entered by Shipman on cremation Form B.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers.
Personal Background
From the age of 14, Mr Harrison had worked as a miner but he developed chest problems and had to retire early. Mrs Woolley remembers that, even when she was a child, her father was often very breathless. In the years leading up to his death, Mr Harrison was admitted to various hospitals on account of his chest problems. He was prescribed tablets although he never had an inhaler. After Mrs Woolley was married and left home, she visited her parents daily.
The Day of the Death
During the week before he died, Mr Harrison was quite poorly, although Mrs Woolley thought that he had seemed worse in the past. On the morning of the day of her father’s death, Mrs Woolley was at her parents’ house. Mr Harrison was unwell and his general practitioner (GP) had been asked to call. Mrs Woolley left at about 1.30pm and, at that time, her father was still at home. However, it is clear that, during the afternoon, he was admitted to PGI by ambulance. Mrs Harrison did not accompany her husband, as she was suffering from a cold.
At about 7pm that evening, the police attended Mrs Woolley’s home and told her that her father had died. She went to the hospital where she met her mother. Mrs Woolley was shocked that her father had died so quickly, although she had realised that he had been very unwell earlier that day. She had not expected him to die because she thought that he had looked worse in the past, yet had gone on to recover. Mrs Woolley wanted there to be a post-mortem examination so that it could be established whether her father had been suffering from a respiratory disease caused by his work as a miner. Mrs Harrison, however, did not want a post-mortem examination and Mrs Woolley did not pursue the matter further.
Certification
The time of death is not recorded on cremation Form A, which was signed by Mrs Harrison. Shipman completed Form B. He stated that Mr Harrison died at
‘20.30hr’
. He said that he attended Mr Harrison for
‘12-18’
hours during his last illness. He said that he had last seen Mr Harrison alive at
‘20.25hr’
, i.e. five minutes before the death. He went on to say that he saw the body immediately after the death and that he carried out a
‘complete’
examination of it. He said that the cause of death was acute bronchitis due to chronic bronchitis and emphysema. The mode of death was said to be a coma lasting
‘30-45 minutes’
. He said that he knew that from his own observations. He said that he was present at the moment of death. He said that Sister Byford nursed the deceased during the last illness but did not say that she (or anyone else apart from himself) was present at the death.
Mrs Woolley disputes the accuracy of some of these entries. She believes that her father died before 8.30pm. She thinks that the police came to her home at 7pm and told her that her father had died. Mrs Woolley says that Shipman cannot have attended her father for 12-18 hours before his death because her father was still at home at 1.30pm. Mrs Woolley cannot comment on whether her father had been in a coma for 30-45 minutes prior to his death. She does not know whether her mother arrived at the hospital before or after Mr Harrison died. Mrs Woolley’s mother told her that her father had been on his own when he died.
Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain completed Form C. He recorded that he had seen and questioned Shipman and also that he had seen and questioned the nursing staff on Ward 2. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Other Events
Mrs Byford does not remember Mr Harrison. Shipman also certified the cause of death of Mr Thomas Henry Ridge, who also died in a cubicle on Ward 1 that evening. I am suspicious that Shipman caused Mr Ridge’s death.
Conclusion
In the absence of hospital records, I cannot say whether Mr Harrison’s death was sudden and unexpected. He was plainly quite poorly. However, Mrs Woolley did not remain with her parents when her father was about to be admitted to hospital and Mrs Harrison did not accompany her husband to hospital. These facts suggest that they did not expect him to die so soon. That said, it is entirely possible that Mr Harrison was gravely ill on arrival at hospital and died from natural causes later that day.
There are, however, some grounds for suspecting that Shipman caused Mr Harrison’s death. The first and most obvious ground is that Shipman stated on Form B that he had seen Mr Harrison alive five minutes before his death and that he was also present, impliedly alone, at the moment of death. I have explained in
Chapter Seven
that the fact that Shipman claimed on Form B to have been present alone at a death did not necessarily mean that he was. The claim does give rise to suspicion, however, and, if he was present, it means that Shipman had the opportunity to administer something that could have caused Mr Harrison’s death.
Second, Shipman did not report the case to the coroner even though a report was required in any case where death occurred within 24 hours of hospital admission. As I have explained in
Chapter Seven
, I believe that Shipman sometimes sought to avoiding reporting a death to the coroner even when it was entirely natural, possibly for selfish financial reasons, possibly to avoid the need for further formalities. In this case, however, the need to report to the coroner was quite clear and Shipman exaggerated the period of time for which he had attended Mr Harrison. Very recently, in connection with death of Mr John Brewster on 28th April 1972, Shipman had expressly noted that he would not report the death to the coroner and this causes me to feel significant suspicion about Mr Brewster’s death. It is quite plain to me that by the time of Mr Harrison’s death, Shipman was well aware of the circumstances in which a report to the coroner was required.
There is a third ground for suspicion in this case. The death occurred in the evening, when, in general, there would be fewer members of the nursing staff on duty and when it would be easier for Shipman to gain sole access to patients. A higher proportion of deaths certified by Shipman took place between 6pm and midnight than for any other doctor working at PGI. My conclusion is there are significant grounds for suspecting that Shipman may have killed Mr Harrison.
I very much regret that I have had to raise these doubts so many years after the death and I am sorry for the distress this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI, once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001