The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Walter Martin Hodgson
Introduction
Mr Walter Martin Hodgson died on Ward 2, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Friday, 12th
May 1972 at the age of 58. He had been admitted to PGI about four days earlier. Shipman certified that the cause of death was ventricular failure due to chronic bronchitis and emphysema. Cor pulmonale (enlargement of the right ventricle of the heart) was said to be a secondary cause of death. At the time of Mr Hodgson’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Moira Anderson, Mr Hodgson’s daughter. A statement was also taken from Mrs Anne Calverley (formerly Miss Anne Paley), who was at the time the senior nursing sister on the ward. Mr Hodgson’s hospital records are no longer available. Mr Hodgson’s body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. No post-mortem examination was performed.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers.
Personal Background
Mr Hodgson was a widower. He had suffered from tuberculosis some years before his death and it is suggested that this had left him with emphysema and bronchitis. He suffered from chronic severe respiratory problems for which he was on a maintenance dose of steroids. He had swollen ankles for the last two years of his life, symptoms which Mrs Anderson, who later worked as a nurse, ascribes (probably correctly) to a heart problem. Until the last year of his life, Mr Hodgson lived some distance from Pontefract. About a year before his death, he moved to Pontefract to live with Mrs Anderson. By that time, his health was such that he could not live independently. However, his condition remained stable until a few weeks before he died. He was seen by his general practitioner (GP) only infrequently.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
About three weeks before he died, Mr Hodgson became more breathless and unwell; he was nursed by Mrs Anderson. Four days before he died, his GP decided that he should be admitted to hospital. Mrs Anderson agreed to this course as her father was feeling very unwell. However, she did not think that he was close to death. Mrs Anderson recalls that her father was admitted to PGI by ambulance, accompanied by Mrs Anderson.
Mr Hodgson was admitted to a side room or cubicle on Ward 2. The usual practice at the time on Wards 1 and 2 was to accommodate a patient in a side room or cubicle when s/he became seriously ill or close to death. This would be compatible with Mrs Anderson’s assessment that her father’s condition was quite serious.
Mrs Anderson did not see a doctor either at the time when Mr Hodgson was admitted or during her visits over the following days, which took place in the evenings between 7pm and 8pm. She visited her father on the evening of the day before his death and saw that he was being given oxygen. She asked a nurse if Mr Hodgson’s condition had deteriorated and the nurse assured her to the contrary. She informed Mrs Anderson that Mr Hodgson was improving and that the staff were hoping that he could safely be transferred to Ackton Hospital, which was an annexe of PGI where patients with chronic, rather than acute, conditions were treated. Mr Hodgson was conscious and alert and able to speak despite the oxygen tube. He seemed comfortable and relaxed and his condition seemed quite stable. Mrs Anderson said that, from a nursing perspective, she would describe Mr Hodgson’s condition that evening as unwell, but not acutely so. Mrs Anderson is aware that her brother contacted the hospital that evening by telephone and that he was told that Mr Hodgson was not too poorly and that a visit at the weekend would be in order.
The Day of the Death
The next day, Mrs Anderson arrived at PGI at 7pm for her evening visit. At the entrance to the ward, she was met by a nurse who took her into the sister’s office. Mrs Anderson was told that her father had deteriorated about an hour earlier and had died only ten minutes before her arrival. The nurse explained that no one had tried to contact her because she did not have a telephone and she was expected to arrive for a visit soon. Mrs Anderson did not speak to a doctor. Nor did she see Mr Hodgson’s body.
Mrs Anderson was very shocked by the death but she knew that her father had been unwell and the death was explicable to her. She had no concerns about her father’s treatment at the time although, years later, with the benefit of her nursing experience, it had occurred to her that he could have been deteriorating for some time without being noticed before he actually died. She recognised that, even
‘with the best will in the world’
, nurses on a busy ward cannot always check on the patients as often as they might like.
Certification
On cremation Form A, which was signed by Mrs Anderson, but probably completed with the assistance of the funeral director, the time of the death is not entered. Shipman completed cremation Form B. He stated that the death had occurred on 12th
May at
‘1810hrs’
. This is slightly, but not significantly, inconsistent with what Mrs Anderson remembers being told by the nurse when she arrived at the hospital. Shipman recorded that he had attended Mr Hodgson during his last illness for a period of four days. He said that he last saw Mr Hodgson alive on
‘12/5/72’
. He said that he saw the body ten minutes after death when he had made a
‘complete’
examination of it. He said that the cause of death was ventricular failure due to chronic bronchitis and emphysema. Cor pulmonale was said to have contributed to the death. He said the mode of death was coma of
‘30-40 minutes’
duration; that was said to be based on his own observation. He stated that Sister Paley had nursed Mr Hodgson during his final illness, although he said that no one was present at the moment of death. Since he claimed to have observed for at least some time Mr Hodgson’s final coma and since he claimed that he saw the body within ten minutes after the death, it is likely that Shipman was on Ward 2 and closely involved in Mr Hodgson’s treatment during the early evening of that day. Mrs Calverley has no recollection of Mr Hodgson. She states that, taking into account his history of chronic illness, he would not have been resuscitated had he collapsed.
Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain completed Form C. He recorded that he had seen and questioned Shipman and also that he had seen and questioned the nursing staff on Ward 2. He did not claim to have spoken to any of Mr Hodgson’s relatives and Mrs Anderson confirmed that she was never contacted by Dr Hasnain. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Conclusion
Even in the absence of medical records, it seems clear that Mr Hodgson was quite seriously ill at the time of his admission to PGI. Although Mrs Anderson was told that her father’s condition was improving, I am not sure that this was in fact the case. First, he had not been moved from the cubicle, as would have been the usual practice if he had improved. Second, the fact that he was being given oxygen is suggestive of a deterioration in his condition. It is entirely possible, even likely, that Mr Hodgson’s condition deteriorated further shortly before his death and that his death was natural and due to the causes given by Shipman on Form B. The mode of death described by Shipman is also consistent with what is known about Mr Hodgson’s condition. My only concern is that Shipman’s statements on cremation certificates cannot be trusted as being truthful and accurate. It appears from Form B that Shipman was on the ward during the period immediately before Mr Hodgson’s death and I cannot rule out the possibility that he gave Mr Hodgson something which hastened his death. However, I stress that there is no evidence that he did. I regret to say that there is insufficient evidence for me to provide a more definite opinion about Mr Hodgson’s death.
I very much regret that the Inquiry has had to make these enquiries so many years after the death, and I am sorry for the distress this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001