The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Ruth Margaret Harrison
Introduction
Ruth Margaret Harrison died on Hydes Medical Ward, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Monday, 21st
August 1972, at the age of almost three months. She had been admitted to PGI about two and a half months before she died. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was anaemia; hypogammaglobulinaemia was said to have contributed to the death. At the time of Ruth’s death, Shipman was a registrar in paediatrics.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Colin Harrison, Ruth’s father, who is named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’). The Inquiry has also taken a statement from Ruth’s mother, Mrs Susan Harrison. Unfortunately, the medical records relating to Ruth’s admission to PGI are no longer available. Ruth was buried, so there are no cremation documents. A post-mortem examination was carried out on Ruth’s body. The report of the examination is no longer available although the PGI mortuary post-mortem book, which contains brief details of each post-mortem examination performed there, was made available to the Inquiry.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Ruth was born at home on 26th
May 1972. She was a normal weight and had no obvious health problems. A few days after the birth, Mrs Harrison noticed a suppurating lump under one of Ruth’s arms. She consulted the midwife and her general practitioner and was advised to put powder on it and that the problem would resolve in due course. Mrs Harrison was not satisfied with this and sought a second medical opinion. After examining Ruth, the second doctor ordered that she be admitted to hospital immediately. Mrs Harrison is unsure precisely when her daughter was admitted to hospital but thinks that she was only about two weeks old.
In-Patient Treatment
Ruth remained at PGI from the time of her admission until her death. Mrs Harrison attended the hospital every day, usually in both the morning and the afternoon. Mr Harrison would visit each morning before work.
Mrs Harrison does not recall ever being told specifically what Ruth’s underlying medical problem was. She was told that her daughter had an enlarged liver and spleen. Ruth had regular blood transfusions of her mother’s blood. Mrs Harrison remembers that, at some point, Ruth’s abdomen started to swell up. At that time, she was on a drip. She also recalls that, at some stage, a member of the hospital staff took her and her husband to one side and said that Ruth was very poorly. However, even after that conversation, Mrs Harrison did not think that Ruth was going to die.
The Day of the Death
Mr and Mrs Harrison visited their daughter on the morning of the day of her death. As usual, they telephoned the hospital at lunchtime to check on Ruth’s condition and were told that she was comfortable. Mr Harrison has said that if they had been told that their daughter was in danger, he would have returned to the hospital and would not have gone into work that afternoon.
At about 5pm on the day of Ruth’s death, Mr Harrison received a telephone call at work to say that Ruth had died. He went straight to the hospital. Mrs Harrison had not visited Ruth that afternoon, as she usually did. She arrived soon after her husband. One of the staff told them that if Ruth had survived, she would have been severely disabled. However, Mr and Mrs Harrison were not given a full explanation of Ruth’s illness and have never understood why she died.
Post-Mortem Examination Report
The brief record of the post-mortem examination states:
‘PM72/296 23 HARRISON Ruth 3mths Pickup PGI. Awaiting histology reports RS’
This entry indicates that Ruth’s post-mortem examination (PM72/296) took place on 23rd
August 1972, that she was three months old when she died and that she was referred for post-mortem examination by Dr Douglas Pickup, who was the consultant paediatrician at the PGI. No cause of death was recorded because, at the time that the entry was made, histology reports were awaited. The initials
‘RS’
are those of the pathologist. Unfortunately, the histology reports, which would have been placed with the other medical records, have not survived.
Certification
The cause of death was certified by Shipman as due to anaemia. No underlying cause for the anaemia was provided. The death certificate gives
‘Hypogamma globinaemia’
(
sic
) as a contributory cause of death, unrelated to the principal cause. Dr Aneez Esmail, Medical Advisor to the Inquiry, has advised me that hypogammaglobulinaemia is a condition which results in a deficiency of the immune system. This underlying condition would have been diagnosed by analysis of a blood sample while Ruth was alive. This condition would have meant that Ruth would have had very little resistance to infection.
The death was registered on 23rd
August 1972, the day on which the post-mortem examination took place. It appears that Shipman decided not to wait for the histology results before providing a certificate of cause of death. Dr Esmail has told me that it is likely that it would have taken at least four to five days for the test results to be available. In circumstances like this, it would be usual practice for the doctor to provide a general or provisional cause of death, so that the family could proceed with the funeral arrangements rather than oblige them to wait until the test results were available and the full details of the cause of death fully known. It is likely that the underlying cause of Ruth’s anaemia would be revealed by the histology results and would be communicated to the registrar of births and deaths. However, it appears that the family may not have been told the results of the histology. If they were told, it seems that the results were not explained as they should have been.
Medical Evidence
Because Mr and Mrs Harrison have never understood why their daughter died and because they are now understandably concerned to think that Shipman might have been involved, I have asked Dr Esmail to explain, so far as possible, what he thinks must have happened.
He says that the suppurating lump under Ruth’s arm shows that she had developed an infection. He cannot say what kind of infection that was. However, it appears that the second doctor to be consulted by Mrs Harrison realised that Ruth had a serious condition and arranged for her admission to hospital. There, the fact that Ruth required regular blood transfusions shows that she was obviously not able to make adequate supplies of blood. Mr and Mrs Harrison were told that Ruth’s liver and spleen were enlarged. This suggests that there was a major problem with the formation of blood cells. Mrs Harrison’s recollection that Ruth’s abdomen was swollen is significant. This may have been due to a gross enlargement of the spleen or possibly due to the formation of fluid which would suggest an advanced stage of liver failure. Dr Esmail says that it would have been very difficult in the early 1970s to find out the underlying cause of Ruth’s blood disorder and to treat it. He thinks that the hospital was probably trying to find out the cause and, in the meantime, was keeping Ruth alive with blood transfusions. The transfusions could not cure her; they could only keep her alive. Dr Esmail thinks that Ruth was extremely ill and that the member of staff who took Mr and Mrs Harrison aside to speak to them was probably trying to warn them of the seriousness of Ruth’s condition but that the message was not conveyed clearly enough.
Dr Esmail says that it is not at all surprising that Ruth should have died so suddenly. Her resistance to infection would have been greatly reduced. He thinks that it is quite possible that she could have appeared stable at lunchtime and have succumbed to an infection by late afternoon.
Conclusion
Mr and Mrs Harrison are naturally concerned now that they know that the cause of their daughter’s death was certified by Shipman. In the absence of any medical records, it is not known what part he played in looking after and treating Ruth during her stay on the paediatric ward. He was the registrar at the time and he is bound to have been involved. In the absence of the records, it is not possible to discover what steps the medical staff were taking to try to find out the cause of Ruth’s disorder or to treat it.
Because Shipman worked on the ward, it must be accepted that it is possible that Shipman had formed the view that Ruth’s death was inevitable and took advantage of the absence of her mother to give her something which hastened her death. However, I think that is unlikely. There would be nursing staff about on the ward on a weekday afternoon and it would not be easy for Shipman to have private access to Ruth. I do not think he would have harmed Ruth in the sight of a member of the nursing staff. I think that it is far more likely that Ruth died a natural death as the result of her very serious blood disorder.
I very much regret the fact that this Inquiry has reopened memories of a tragic episode in the lives of Mr and Mrs Harrison. It must have been very worrying for them to think that Shipman might have been involved in the care of their daughter, especially as they have never fully understood the nature of her illness. I hope that they will now have at least some better understanding of what probably happened and I hope too that they will feel able to accept my reassurance that there is no reason to think that Shipman did anything to hasten Ruth’s death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001