The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Butterfield Hammill
Introduction
Mr Butterfield Hammill died at Ackton Hospital, Ackton, Pontefract, on Tuesday, 4th
April 1972 at the age of 86. Ackton Hospital was an annexe to Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI), and was located about two miles away from it. It never had a resident doctor. Shipman could and did treat patients there from time to time. Mr Hammill had been admitted to PGI on Monday, 27th
March 1972 and was transferred to Ackton Hospital on Friday, 31st
March. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was ventilatory failure due to chronic bronchitis. At the time of Mr Hammill’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
Mr Hammill’s son, Mr Vernon Hammill, is named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’) but he has since died. The Inquiry has, however, taken a witness statement from two of Mr Hammill’s grandsons, Mr Ian Hammill and Mr Stuart Makings. The Inquiry has had access to Mr Hammill’s hospital records. Mr Hammill was buried and so there are no cremation forms. It appears that no post-mortem examination was performed. Professor Richard Baker has considered and commented on the available documents.
Mr Ian Hammill has told the Inquiry that no one in his family ever had any concerns about his grandfather’s death. He became aware that Shipman had certified the cause of death only when he was so informed by the Inquiry.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mr Hammill had worked as a mining foreman. For many years, he suffered from chronic bronchitis and breathing difficulties. He lived with his second wife until about a year before his death, when his health deteriorated and he moved to live with and to be cared for by his daughter, Mrs Vera Makings, and her husband. Mrs Makings is now dead. Mr Stuart Makings recalls that his grandfather was in very poor health during the last nine months of his life. He required a great deal of nursing care. For about the last three months of his life, Mr Hammill was confined to bed and members of the family took it in turns to sit up with him during the night. Mrs Makings was reluctant to let her father go into hospital as she thought that it would hasten his end.
It is clear from the evidence of Mr Makings that his grandfather was in extremely poor health at the time of his admission to hospital and that it was only the devoted care provided by Mr Makings’ mother that delayed the inevitable hospital admission. Eventually, it appears that Mr Hammill’s general practitioner (GP) decided that
‘enough was enough’
. Mr Makings said that, at the time of admission, his grandfather was a
‘haunting sight’
. He was emaciated and gasping for breath. There had been physical and mental deterioration. Mr Makings recalls visiting his grandfather once or twice in hospital. He knew that his grandfather had not long to live. When the death came, it was wholly expected.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
On 27th
March 1972, Mr Hammill’s GP spoke with Shipman, who agreed to admit Mr Hammill to PGI. In a referral letter following that conversation, the GP wrote that Mr Hammill was on the waiting list for admission to Headlands Hospital, the local geriatric hospital, and had a long history of chronic bronchitis. He explained that, over the winter, Mr Hammill had suffered two episodes of bronchopneumonia and a mini-stroke. He went on to say that, about 12 days previously, he had begun to present symptoms suggestive of uraemia, although his condition then improved after he had been fed through a Ryle’s tube. The GP said, however, that Mr Hammill was more confused than ever that day (i.e. 27th
March) and was refusing food and drink from his daughter or her husband.
Shipman’s record of that conversation is very brief. It records that Mr Hammill was being admitted because he was
‘uraemic’
. He recorded the following as a diagnosis:
‘(1) Social Problem.
‘(2) Chronic Bronchitis.’
It appears that Shipman examined Mr Hammill at about 8pm that evening. In the clinical records, he recorded the history, which was essentially consistent with what had been written by the GP. He also recorded (and this no doubt reflects the
‘social problem’
element of the diagnosis he had made) that the GP had tried to admit Mr Hammill to Headlands Hospital, but that there was no bed available. Shipman recorded that Mr Hammill was
‘not a good historian’
. Some vesicular breath sounds were heard although there was little or no other positive finding recorded on examination. Routine tests and examinations were ordered and the Ryle’s tube was removed.
Three days later, on 30th
March 1972, Shipman wrote a letter to the consultant geriatrician at Headlands Hospital. He recorded the details of the admission and the treatment given and said that Mr Hammill was being transferred to Ackton Hospital (he was in fact transferred on 31st
March). He asked that Mr Hammill be put on the waiting list for admission to Headlands Hospital. The results of the routine tests and investigations were reported in a letter written by the consultant physician, Dr Robert Meikle, to Mr Hammill’s GP after Mr Hammill’s death. The findings were consistent with an infection and the presumed diagnosis was chronic bronchitis. An x-ray showed pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema.
In-Patient Treatment
Mr Hammill was visited by his family in hospital. His daughter visited daily. There is no indication in the records that Mr Hammill received treatment for bronchitis and, in particular, there is no reference to antibiotics. It appears from a note in Shipman’s hand that, when transferred on 31st
March 1972, Mr Hammill was prescribed 100mg Largactil at night
‘for sedation’
since he was confused. This is a very large dose of Largactil, especially for an elderly man in Mr Hammill’s condition. In
Chapter Four
, I reported that a dose of 100mg Largactil, while not lethal in itself, might well contribute to a patient’s death, especially where s/he already had a chest infection or a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The mechanism would be by the suppression of respiration or the cough reflex. In the British National Formulary for 1974-1976 (the earliest edition that the Inquiry has been able to obtain), it is said that Largactil is effective for the treatment of agitation, especially in the elderly. It is said that small doses are adequate and 25mg is recommended. There is no express warning about the dangerous effect that a larger dose might have on the patient’s respiration. It may be that the danger had not then been generally recognised. Nonetheless, the dose of 100mg was greatly in excess of the recommended dose and I would have thought that the dangers of an excessive dose would be obvious. It seems to me that for Shipman to suggest such a large dose demonstrates at least a degree of recklessness as to Mr Hammill’s welfare.
The Day of the Death
On 4th
April 1972, Shipman made the single short entry in the clinical notes for that day, which reads as follows:
‘PT died
full examination
D.C. signed: 1a Ventilatory Failure
1b) Chronic Bronchitis’
.
On 6th
April 1972, Dr Meikle wrote to the patient’s GP to inform him of his death. In the second paragraph of that letter he wrote:
‘Initially, the patient’s condition seemed satisfactory but I regret to say that he died of respiratory failure on 4th
April, 1972.’
Medical Evidence
According to Professor Baker, who has considered the medical records in this case, there are reasons for concern about the true cause of death. Professor Baker is concerned that Mr Hammill appears to have had a respiratory infection which was not treated. Also, he observes that the dosage of Largactil suggested by Shipman was high and might have encouraged the development of bronchopneumonia. Professor Baker says that the information provided in the notes about the death is minimal and that the term that is used to describe the cause of death (ventilatory failure) is very vague. Whilst acknowledging the absence of a prescription record and nursing notes which might have contained more information to explain Mr Hammill’s care, Professor Baker nevertheless thinks that the care was inappropriate. However, he is unable to say whether the care was deliberately calculated to hasten death or was simply poor.
Conclusion
Mr Hammill was admitted to PGI in circumstances that did not amount to an emergency. According to a letter written by Dr Meikle, consultant physician, to Mr Hammill’s GP after his death, Mr Hammill appears to have had a chest infection. Whether Shipman ever realised that is not clear. In any event, Mr Hammill was transferred to Ackton Hospital on 31st
March. He was not given any treatment for his chest infection and he was started on a high dose of Largactil. Thereafter, very little was noted in the medical records until Shipman recorded that Mr Hammill had died. That is not entirely surprising, as there was no resident doctor at Ackton. It is entirely possible that Shipman did not see Mr Hammill alive after he left PGI. There is no cremation documentation to provide information about the circumstances of death. In my view, there is no evidence to suggest that Shipman deliberately did anything which directly caused Mr Hammill’s death. However, in the light of Professor Baker’s observations, it seems to me that it is entirely possible that Shipman decided to hasten Mr Hammill’s death by withholding antibiotic treatment and by suggesting large doses of Largactil at night. These two factors combined would increase the risk that Mr Hammill would succumb to bronchopneumonia. That said, Shipman did not expressly record that Mr Hammill had a chest infection and it is possible that he overlooked that fact and that his failure to prescribe an antibiotic was negligent rather than deliberate. I cannot say whether Shipman suggested that Mr Hammill be given very large doses of Largactil deliberately intending to hasten his death. He might have done or he might have been reckless as to the effect of a large dose. In short, I find it impossible to say whether or not Shipman hastened Mr Hammill’s death, although I suspect that he did so, either deliberately or recklessly.
I very much regret that I have had to raise these doubts so many years after the death and I am sorry for the distress this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman's conduct at PGI once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001