The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Albert Hewitt
Introduction
Mr Albert Hewitt died on Ward 2, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Thursday, 27th
July 1972 at the age of 87. He had been admitted to PGI two days earlier. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was congestive heart failure. Chronic bronchitis was said to have been a contributory cause of death. At the time of Mr Hewitt’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Peter Hewitt and Mr Christopher Caulkin, Mr Hewitt’s son and grandson respectively. The Inquiry has also taken a statement from Mrs Linda Byford who was, at the time, a junior nursing sister on Ward 1. Mr Caulkin’s mother, Mrs Mabel Caulkin, who was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’), has since died. The Inquiry has had access to Mr Hewitt’s hospital records. Mr Hewitt’s body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. No post-mortem examination was performed. Professor Richard Baker has considered and commented on the available documents.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mr Hewitt was a widower. He had three children. At the time of his death, he was living with his daughter, Mrs Caulkin, and her family. Mr Caulkin, who was 21 at the time of the death, was living at home and saw a good deal of his grandfather.
Mr Hewitt had served in the First World War. When he returned to civilian life, he became a miner. In his mid-50s, he had to leave mining on account of an eye condition but he then worked as a gardener until he was over 70.
Mr Hewitt smoked heavily and he had chest problems, probably from the combined effects of coal dust and cigarette smoke. He was also partially deaf. Mr Hewitt’s general practitioner (GP) was a family friend and visited every month or so to keep an eye on him. Mr Caulkin remembers that his grandfather kept some tablets beside his bed but he does not know what they were for.
Mr Peter Hewitt remembers that his father became very tired during the last 12 months of his life and became increasingly dependent on Mrs Caulkin. Mr Caulkin remembers that, towards the end of his life, his grandfather was unable to manage the stairs and his bed was moved into the downstairs front room.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
Neither Mr Peter Hewitt nor Mr Caulkin has a clear recollection of the circumstances of Mr Hewitt’s admission to PGI. Mr Peter Hewitt thinks that there was no sudden event but that his father’s condition had deteriorated to the extent that he required constant care. Mr Caulkin has some recollection of a specific event. He thinks that, one morning, when his mother took her father a cup of tea, she found him very ill or possibly unconscious and called an ambulance.
The medical notes show that Mr Hewitt was admitted from home at the request of a Dr Minocha, who, according to Mr Peter Hewitt and Mr Caulkin, was not Mr Hewitt’s usual GP. The admission note was made by a doctor other than Shipman. It states that Mr Hewitt was known to suffer from congestive heart failure and chronic bronchitis with emphysema but that his condition had deteriorated over the three days prior to admission. On examination, the doctor noted an enlarged liver and crepitations in the chest. A number of drugs were prescribed. Mr Hewitt was also noted to be suffering from orthopnoea, which is caused by impaired function on the left side of the heart and which causes difficulty breathing when lying flat.
Mr Peter Hewitt visited his father on the evening of Wednesday, 26th
July, the day before he died. His bed was in the main area of the ward. Mr Peter Hewitt remembers that his father looked worn out. He was tired, listless and was propped up in bed by pillows. He was, however, fully conscious and was able to speak to his visitors. At the end of the visit, Mr Peter Hewitt and his wife both thought that Mr Hewitt was close to death. Indeed, when they returned to the car, Mr Peter Hewitt’s wife suggested that he should go back and say goodbye to his father because she thought his death was imminent. Mr Peter Hewitt returned to see his father and then left the hospital at about 8pm.
The Day of the Death
On Thursday, 27th
July, Mr Peter Hewitt received a telephone call from his niece, Mrs Bertha Carter, to say that Mr Hewitt had died. He is not sure at what time he received this telephone call or at what time of day his father had died.
The final entry in the medical records, which was made by Shipman (and was the only entry he made), states as follows:
‘27/7/72
0705hrs pt died
saw body at 8.00 in mortuary
(1) CHF
(2) Chronic bronchitis
H Shipman’
Professor Baker has reviewed the available medical records and observed that it did not appear that Shipman was present at the death.
Certification
Shipman completed cremation Form B. He recorded that death had occurred at
‘0705 hrs’
on 27th
July 1972. He said that he had attended Mr Hewitt during his last illness for two days. He stated that he had last seen Mr Hewitt alive on
‘26/7/72’
. He said he had seen the body one hour after death and that he had performed a complete examination. If the entry in the medical records was correct, that examination took place in the hospital mortuary. The causes of death were as on the death certificate. Shipman said that the mode of death was
‘coma’
of
‘8 hours’
duration. Those answers were given on the basis of his and Sister Byford’s observations. Shipman said that Mr Hewitt had been nursed during his last illness by Sister Byford. He also said that no one had been present at the moment of death.
Mrs Byford does not remember Mr Hewitt. It is quite possible that Shipman identified her, not because she personally nursed Mr Hewitt, but because she was a sister on the ward.
Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain completed Form C. He recorded that he had seen and questioned Shipman and that he had also seen and questioned the nursing staff on Ward 2. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Conclusion
It is clear from the first entry in the hospital records, which was not made by Shipman, that Mr Hewitt was very poorly at the time of his admission to PGI. He was suffering from heart failure. On the day before the death, Mr Peter Hewitt and his wife realised that Mr Hewitt was close to death. Shipman may have seen Mr Hewitt at some time during that day, although there is no record of him doing so. It may well be that, by that time, Mr Hewitt was receiving only general nursing care. There is no evidence that Shipman saw Mr Hewitt at or around the time of death. In my view, there is every reason to believe that Mr Hewitt’s death was natural and no reason at all to suspect that Shipman was involved in it.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001