The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Eunice Holbrook
Introduction
Mrs Eunice Holbrook died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Wednesday, 5th
May 1971 at the age of 71. It is unclear for how long she had been in PGI before she died but it seems unlikely that it was for more than a few days. Shipman certified that the cause of death was aleukaemic myeloblastic leukaemia. At the time of Mrs Holbrook’s death, Shipman was a house officer in medicine.
Mrs Holbrook’s nephew, Mr Norman Wiles, was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’). Mr Wiles has since died. The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Holbrook’s niece, Mrs Sandra Thompson, who was treated as a daughter by Mrs Holbrook. Mrs Holbrook’s hospital records are no longer available. She was buried and so there was no cremation documentation. No post-mortem examination was performed.
In her Inquiry statement, Mrs Thompson stated that she had no suspicions about Mrs Holbrook’s death, although she was upset that she had died alone.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mr and Mrs Holbrook raised Mrs Thompson from the age of ten months. Mrs Holbrook and Mrs Thompson were very close. Mrs Thompson remembers that, during the last 12 months of her life, Mrs Holbrook used to be very tired and generally stayed indoors. She was often very pale. She went into hospital for blood transfusions, which would restore her strength and colour. It was only after her death, however, that Mrs Thompson learned that Mrs Holbrook had leukaemia. By the time of her last admission to hospital, Mrs Holbrook had become bedbound.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
On the occasion of her last admission, Mrs Holbrook was taken to PGI by ambulance. Mrs Thompson has little recollection of the circumstances but knows that Mrs Holbrook was admitted to Ward 1. She thinks that Mrs Holbrook was on the main ward rather than in a side room or cubicle.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Thompson believes that Mrs Holbrook cannot have been in PGI very long before she died. She can only remember visiting Mrs Holbrook once. She knows that Mrs Holbrook died shortly after that visit. That visit took place soon after Mr Holbrook had arrived home from an evening visit to PGI. He was extremely distressed and kept saying,
‘she’s dying, she’s dying’
. Mrs Thompson tried to calm him and made him a cup of tea and put him to bed. She then caught the last bus to PGI, which would have been at about 9.40pm.
When she arrived at PGI, usual visiting hours had ended but Mrs Thompson was nevertheless allowed to see Mrs Holbrook. It was clear that Mrs Holbrook was dying. Her face and hands were a strange grey colour. The whites of her eyes were
‘yellow-green’
. She could not keep her eyes open. Her face was pinched and gaunt. When Mrs Thompson held her hand there was no response and she was not sure if Mrs Holbrook was aware of her presence. Her body was still and Mrs Thompson formed the impression that she was heavily sedated. She does not remember seeing any medical devices or equipment around the bed.
Mrs Thompson wanted to stay with Mrs Holbrook and asked permission to do so but says that her request was refused. She has a recollection that the nurses were busy with their chores and wanted her out of the way. She gave the nurses a telephone number at which she could be contacted. The Holbrooks did not have a telephone. Then she left and caught the last bus home.
There was no telephone call that night or the next morning and so Mrs Thompson went to PGI at the first visiting time the next day, which would have been in the early afternoon. She did not go onto the ward, but asked a member of staff where Mrs Holbrook was. She was told Mrs Holbrook had died. Mrs Thompson was very upset because she would have been with Mrs Holbrook when she died if she had been allowed to stay overnight. Mrs Holbrook’s husband died four or five years later and never spoke about his wife’s death.
Conclusion
From the evidence of Mrs Thompson, it is clear that that Mrs Holbrook’s leukaemia had reached a terminal stage. From Mrs Thompson’s description of Mrs Holbrook’s appearance and her evidence of Mr Holbrook’s distress, I am satisfied that Mrs Holbrook was close to death at the time of the last visit. It is highly likely that Mrs Holbrook’s death was due to natural causes. I cannot absolutely rule out the possibility that Shipman did something to hasten Mrs Holbrook’s death but there is no evidence that he did so.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001