The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Jozef Iwanina
Introduction
Mr Jozef Iwanina died at his home, 3 Clough Fold Road, Hyde on Friday, 16th
May 1986 at the age of 63. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and thought highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In February 2000, Mr Iwanina's daughter, Miss Janet Elizabeth Iwanina, contacted the Greater Manchester Police to express concern about the circumstances of her father's death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mr Iwanina's widow, Mrs Nancy Iwanina. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Iwanina, Miss Iwanina and from Mr Geoffrey Young and Mr Michael James Young (Mr Iwanina's next door neighbour and his neighbour's son). The Inquiry has also made enquiries of several other neighbours. The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1986. Mr Iwanina's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Iwanina was an active man who worked as a telephone engineer until late 1985, when he was made redundant. Shortly before ceasing work, he was told by Shipman that he had angina. Miss Iwanina recalls that, in the months before her father died, he attended Tameside General Hospital for an electrocardiogram examination, the results of which were said to be normal. Mrs Iwanina remembers that, at the time of her husband's death, he was awaiting an appointment at hospital to establish whether he was a suitable candidate for a heart by-pass operation. According to the family, his condition did not affect his level of activity and he remained as physically and mentally active after his retirement as he had always been. He did a lot of gardening and took on a large number of do-it-yourself projects in the house. The only sign of illness that he displayed was slight shortness of breath on cold days.
Mrs Iwanina says that Shipman was not in the habit of calling at their home. She can remember only two occasions when he visited: once when she had a slipped disc and the other when her husband had a bowel upset.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Iwanina last saw her husband alive at about 7.30am on 16th
May 1986 when he drove her to work. He seemed well at that time.
Mr Geoffrey Young last saw Mr Iwanina on the morning of Mr Iwanina's death. Mr Iwanina was in his garden and was repairing the boundary fence between the properties. He was driving fence posts into the ground, which was strenuous work. Mr Iwanina seemed well. Mr Geoffrey Young left home at about 12.30pm when his wife drove him into work. He did not see Shipman that morning.
Some time between 1pm and 2pm, Mr Michael Young arrived home from work and saw Mr Iwanina in his front garden. He thinks that they said 'Hello'. Mr Young went indoors, had something to eat and then took a bath or a shower. The bathroom was at the back of the house and the window was open. He recalls that Mr Iwanina remained in his garden, 'pottering about'. He was in the bathroom for about 20 minutes and is almost certain that he heard Mr Iwanina's back door open and close at some point during that time. He did not hear or see anybody arrive at Mr Iwanina's house. At about 3.30-3.45pm, Mr Young's friend, Mr Paul Wilson, visited him and they chatted at the front door. Mr Michael Young does not recollect seeing Shipman in the vicinity that afternoon. None of the other neighbours has any such recollection either. This does not demonstrate that Shipman did not visit, as a visit would not necessarily have been noticed and, if noticed, might well have been forgotten by now.
Mrs Iwanina finished work at about 4pm. She expected her husband to be outside, waiting for her in the car but he was not there. She walked home and arrived about ten minutes later. She found the front door locked as usual but the back door was unlocked. Mrs Iwanina found her husband sitting in his usual armchair in the dining room. He looked comfortable. His head was slightly back, as if he was asleep. He was wearing a shirt and trousers and his cap, which he always wore in the house. His sleeves were rolled up, as usual. The television was off and the newspaper was on a table at his side. Mrs Iwanina had a feeling that her husband was not sleeping and, as she touched him, he did not respond but fell sideways. She feared that he was dead. He looked peaceful and did not appear to have been in pain.
Mrs Iwanina went to the Youngs' house to seek help. Mr Michael Young and Mr Wilson accompanied her back into her house. Mr Young recalls that Mr Iwanina appeared to be asleep. His mouth and eyes were closed and he looked peaceful. Mrs Iwanina also asked another neighbour, Ms Sue Birtles, a nurse, for help. Ms Birtles moved Mr Iwanina onto the floor and into the recovery position. She tried to resuscitate him but without success.
An ambulance arrived, followed by Shipman and the police. By the time Shipman arrived, Mrs Iwanina had gone to the house of her neighbours, Mr Tom and Mrs Maria Ormerod. Shipman went there and told Mrs Iwanina that he had sent the ambulance away because it was too late; her husband had died. Either then or possibly the following day, Shipman also told Mrs Iwanina that he had seen her husband on the day before he died, so there would be no need for a post-mortem examination. Shipman did not say why he had seen Mr Iwanina, and Mrs Iwanina thought it must have been for a repeat prescription. Shipman said that he had told Mr Iwanina that he could die at any time but that Mr Iwanina had said that he did not want to tell his wife because it would worry her and he wanted to carry on as usual. On reflection, Mrs Iwanina thought that her husband had not seen Shipman the day before but Shipman was saying so, out of kindness, so as avoid the need for a post-mortem examination. She thought her husband would have mentioned it if he had seen Shipman the day before.
Mrs Iwanina found that her husband's gardening tools were still out in the garden. He was a very tidy man and she feels sure that if he had finished gardening, he would have put his tools away. Her daughter agrees that her father would not have left his tools out if he did not intend to resume work. She also recalls that there was a half-finished cup of coffee on the sideboard by her father's chair.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). The certificate itself has not survived but the counterfoil has been recovered. On the counterfoil, which was completed on the day of the death, Shipman said that he had last seen Mr Iwanina on 7th
May, which would be nine days before the death. He said that he had seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination. The cause of death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate, on which he recorded that death had occurred at 4pm on 16th
May 1986. Shipman said that he had attended Mr Iwanina for one year during his last illness. Presumably that answer was intended to reflect the onset or diagnosis of ischaemic heart disease. Mrs Iwanina says that it was only six months since the angina had been diagnosed. Shipman stated that he had last seen Mr Iwanina alive on 7th
May 1986. He had seen the body about 45 minutes after death and had made a complete external examination. The cause of death was as stated on the MCCD counterfoil. The mode of death was said to be syncope lasting only seconds. Shipman stated that his answers as to mode and cause of death were based on his own observations of the position in which Mr Iwanina's body was found. It is worth noting that, by the time Shipman arrived, Ms Birtles had already put the body onto the floor to attempt resuscitation. If Shipman asked about the position in which Mr Iwanina had been found, he would have been told that he had been found sitting in his chair, looking as if he was asleep.
There is no entry in the visits book suggesting that Shipman was due to see Mr Iwanina on the day of his death. Nor does his name appear in the visits book for 7th
May. It is possible that Shipman saw Mr Iwanina at his surgery on one or both of those occasions. The Donneybrook appointments books have not survived.
The Expert Evidence
Following his consideration of the cremation certificate Professor Richard Baker concluded that the death of Mr Iwanina was moderately suspicious.
Conclusion
It is possible that Mr Iwanina died a natural death from a cause related to heart disease. The family believed that Mr Iwanina had been diagnosed as having angina and was to be assessed for suitability for bypass surgery. I infer from this that Mr Iwanina must have had ischaemic heart disease. He would therefore be at a significantly increased risk of a heart attack. If it is right that he was doing strenuous work in his garden, as opposed to 'pottering about', it may be that this put additional strain on his heart and precipitated a heart attack.
At some time during the afternoon, Mr Iwanina stopped gardening and went indoors. He might have done so simply to have lunch and a cup of coffee but he might have gone in because he had chest pains. It is even possible that he went in to answer the door to Shipman. However, there is no evidence to suggest that Shipman visited on the day of the death, and Shipman was not in the habit of visiting any member of the family.
So far, everything points to a natural death. There are, however, some unexplained features. Mr Iwanina's position and appearance in death are not typical of those found after a death from heart attack. The generic evidence of Dr John Grenville suggests that this peaceful appearance would be rare after any sudden death, especially one with a cardiac cause. However, this factor is far from conclusive. The index for suspicion is increased because it seems that Shipman falsely claimed that he had seen Mr Iwanina within 14 days before his death. Whether or not Mrs Iwanina is right when she recalls that Shipman said he had seen her husband only the previous day, it does seem likely that Shipman was anxious to avoid a referral to the coroner and a post-mortem examination. Shipman seems to have thought that if he had not seen a patient within 14 days before death, the certificate would be rejected by the registrar, who would refer the case to the coroner. In fact this should not necessarily follow, but there appears to be a common belief among doctors that it does. However, it is possible that this apparent untruth was a 'white lie', told by Shipman in order to avoid the trouble of a referral to the coroner. The Inquiry is aware of several cases in which Shipman made similar false statements in relation to deceased persons whom he did not kill.
It is surprising that Shipman stated that his answers as to mode and cause of death were based on his own observations of the position in which Mr Iwanina's body was found. The position in which the body was found was not suggestive of a sudden cardiac death, although the position in which Shipman first saw the body might have been.
In some ways Mr Iwanina would have been an improbable victim for Shipman to choose. He was quite young and active and lived with his wife. However, it appears that he was to be assessed for suitability for by-pass surgery and it is quite possible that Shipman would have wished to forestall the expensive heart surgery.
I regret to say that I an unable to reach a positive conclusion in this case. There is evidence to suggest that the death was natural but there are factors which arouse my suspicion that Shipman might have killed Mr Iwanina.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001