The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Hannah Jones
Introduction
Mrs Hannah Jones died at her home, 24 Chartist House, Hyde on Wednesday, 10th
July 1985 at the age of 84. She was a widow and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and regarded him highly. He certified that her death was caused by respiratory failure and chronic asthma.
Following the publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions in February 2000, Mrs Jones' daughter, Mrs Pauline Foden, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her mother's death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Foden. Mrs Foden did not hold Shipman in high regard. She thought his poor treatment was to blame for her husband's premature death.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Jones but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken witness statements from Mrs Foden, Mr Roy Douglas Paul Foden (her son), Mrs Alison Foden-Stoddard (her daughter) and from Mrs Jennifer Unsworth (the warden at Chartist House). A report was commissioned from Dr John Grenville. Mrs Jones' medical records have not survived. However, Shipman's personal visits book for 1985 is available. The Inquiry has also obtained a brief statement from District Nurse Clegg, who has produced some relevant extracts from her records.
Mrs Foden and her son both gave oral evidence at a hearing on 19th
October 2001. Mrs Unsworth gave evidence on 24th October 2001 and Dr Grenville gave oral evidence on 14th
November 2001.
Personal Background
According to the evidence of her family, Mrs Jones was a sprightly lady, who would take regular walks. She would do her own shopping and clean her flat. She had suffered with peptic ulcers in the distant past but, until about six months before she died, she was only troubled by the occasional cough or cold. Mrs Foden told the police that her mother took tablets occasionally to 'calm her down'.
Mrs Jones began to suffer occasional breathlessness in early 1985. According to Mrs Foden, her mother had no pain and seemed to carry on much as before. She eventually went to see Shipman about her breathlessness and he prescribed some tablets, to be used when she was breathless. Mrs Foden told the police that Shipman gave her mother two injections, which she presumes were for breathlessness, in early 1985.
Shipman's visits book indicates that Mrs Jones had a period of ill health in April 1985. Shipman appears to have visited her on several occasions in that month. The visits book does not reveal the nature of the illness or the purpose of the visits. After April, there was one isolated visit in June, then no visit until July.
Before coming to Mrs Foden's recollection of the circumstances surrounding her mother's death, it is right that I should explain something of Mrs Foden's own circumstances. Mrs Foden and her husband had been patients of Shipman for some time, when Mr Foden was taken ill. In due course, he was diagnosed as suffering from cancer. Mrs Foden says that when they were given the diagnosis at hospital, the doctor told them that there had been a delay in diagnosis, which had cost Mr Foden the real chance of a recovery. Mrs Foden blamed Shipman for that delay and believed that he was responsible for her husband's death. It is not possible for me to investigate that allegation. However, it is clear that Mrs Foden still feels a profound grievance against Shipman. In evidence, she described him as a murderer, on account of his treatment of her husband. Whilst I can only feel sympathy for Mrs Foden in her loss, I am bound to wonder whether her recollection of the part which Shipman was to play in the death of her mother has been affected by her strong dislike of him.
Mrs Foden's recollection was that her mother was well until Monday, 8th
July. She says that she saw her mother on Sunday, 7th
July and she was well. On 8th
July, she recalls that she called to see her mother on her way to work. Mrs Jones said that she was short of breath and did not want to be left alone. There were no visible signs that she was breathless but Mrs Foden agreed to stay with her and took the day off work. At her mother's request, Mrs Foden agreed to telephone the surgery. Mrs Unsworth called on her morning rounds at about this time and Mrs Foden remembers that either she or Mrs Unsworth made the call to ask the doctor to visit.
I must interpose to say that it appears that Mrs Foden's recollection of her mother's state of health in the days leading up to her death is likely to be at fault. Shipman's visits book shows that he visited Mrs Jones on Thursday, 4th
July and Saturday, 6th
July as well as making the visit to which I am about to come, which occurred on Monday, 8th
July. The nature of Mrs Jones' illness is not revealed but it does seem likely that she had been unwell for a few days before 8th
July.
Mrs Foden recalls that Shipman visited between 3pm and 4pm on the Monday afternoon. Mrs Jones told him that she was short of breath. He performed no examination but said that he would give her an injection that would afford some relief. They all went to Mrs Jones' bedroom where she lay down on the bed. Mrs Foden says that she did not see Shipman actually administer any injection but her mother let out a scream, which shocked her daughter. Mrs Foden says that Shipman made a sharp intake of breath and she knew that he had 'done something wrong'. Shipman said that Mrs Jones was very stressed, that the injection would calm her and that she would probably go into a coma. Mrs Foden did not know what to do. She said that the shock of Shipman saying that her mother would go into a coma was 'like something hitting her'. Mrs Jones had gone into 'a blanked out state'. Mrs Foden said that Shipman then added that that would be the end. Shipman told her that she should contact him if anything happened and that he would attend immediately. He provided his home telephone number. Then he left. Mrs Foden is now of the view that the injection, which Shipman gave on that day, caused her mother's death.
When Shipman had gone, Mrs Foden went into the bedroom to see her mother, who appeared to be asleep. Her breathing was quiet and she was not breathless. At about 8pm, Mrs Foden tried to wake her mother to give her a drink but she was unable to do so and she thought she must be in a coma. Her breathing was still quiet and normal. She remembers that her son, Mr Roy Foden, attended later and that he was also unable to rouse her. He has no recollection of this.
Mrs Foden says that her mother remained in a coma that night and throughout the next day, Tuesday, 9th
July. She says that Shipman did not visit her mother that day. However, Shipman's visits book shows an intention to visit, with a tick through the entry, which seems to signify that the visit took place.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Foden says that on the Wednesday morning, July 10th
, her mother was still in a coma. Her son, Mr Roy Foden, called on his way to work to see if his grandmother had wakened. Mrs Foden says that Shipman did not attend that day although Shipman's visits book contains an entry in Mrs Jones' name with a tick, which seems to indicate that he did visit. Mrs Foden says that Mrs Unsworth called in the morning as usual and Mrs Foden told her what Shipman had said on the Monday. She explained that her mother was now in a coma. Mrs Foden recalls that a district nurse attended, apparently on Shipman's instruction, and bathed Mrs Jones in bed. Mrs Foden says that the nurse found that Mrs Jones' legs were quite black and that the nurse had said that this was because they had been crossed. District Nurse Clegg confirms that she did visit on that day and had planned to visit the next day. Her visit would have been at Shipman's request. Mrs Foden told the police that Mrs Unsworth sat with Mrs Jones for a time in the afternoon so that Mrs Foden could go to the post office. Mrs Foden says that her daughter, Mrs Foden-Stoddard, visited in the evening. She was about to leave when Mrs Jones' breathing changed in sound and tempo. It became slow and heavy and Mrs Foden realised her mother was dying. Mrs Jones died at about 9.50pm.
Mrs Foden waited a while before calling Shipman at home. He came about 15 minutes later. According to Mrs Foden, he did not examine her mother but just said that she was dead. He wrote a certificate and gave it to Mrs Foden there and then. Mrs Foden saw that he had written that the death was due to respiratory failure and chronic asthma. Mrs Foden says that she challenged the accuracy of those causes and Shipman then said that the death was due to emphysema. Mrs Foden says she challenged that diagnosis as well because she knew that emphysema was a smoker's disease and her mother had never smoked a cigarette in her life.
Mr Roy Foden does not remember the death of his grandmother in quite the same way as does his mother. He remembers visiting the flat and seeing his grandmother asleep in bed but does not remember any attempts to waken her. He said that he had the impression that Shipman had given his grandmother an injection to relieve her stress and help her to breathe but that the family had afterwards thought that Shipman had contributed to her death by giving that injection.
Mrs Foden-Stoddard's evidence is to the effect that her grandmother only began to complain of breathlessness one week before her death. She saw her grandmother two days before the day on which she believes Shipman gave the injection. Her grandmother was well, apart from shortness of breath. She was present on the evening of the death and confirms her mother's evidence as to the circumstances of it.
Mrs Unsworth does not recall the circumstances of this death in any detail. She does recall Mrs Jones and remembers that she used to suffer from breathlessness. Mrs Unsworth had the impression that she used to panic and seek attention. However, this was not a serious problem. She remembers that the time came before she died when Mrs Jones was ill in bed. She does not remember her being unconscious or that Mrs Foden told her that her mother was in a coma. Nor does she remember any concern being expressed about Shipman and the giving of an injection.
Certification
On the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death counterfoil, Shipman said that he last saw Mrs Jones on the day of the death. That is in accordance with his own visits book but is contrary to the recollection of Mrs Foden.
Mrs Jones was buried on Monday, 15th
July 1985. There are no cremation documents.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville found this case very puzzling. In the absence of the medical records, he is unable to assess Mrs Jones' state of health before her death. He cannot assess the risks she faced. He thinks that the episodic breathlessness described was suggestive of late-onset asthma, for which tablets may form part of the treatment regime. If, when Shipman attended, either in April or July 1985, Mrs Jones was suffering an acute attack of asthma, then it might have been appropriate to give an injection. The injection could have been of a drug to reverse airways obstruction or it could have been of a steroid.
He can think of no drug which, injected on Monday, could cause death two days later. Furthermore, had the injection been of a large dose of strong opiate, Mrs Jones' breathing thereafter would have been extremely laboured. If the dose had been lethal, she would have died within a few minutes if it had been given intravenously, or within about an hour if it had been given intramuscularly. If Mrs Foden was wrong when she recalls that Shipman's last visit was on Monday, 8th
and if it were to be accepted that he visited on Wednesday, 10th
July, the visit must have been in the evening if Shipman had given an injection which had led directly to Mrs Jones' death.
Doing the best he can with the limited information available, Dr Grenville suspects that Mrs Jones was suffering from lung disease with a reversible element and an underlying irreversible element. Now that the visits book has been made available, it can be seen that Shipman was probably visiting rather more frequently than Mrs Foden had said. Dr Grenville thinks it possible that Mrs Jones was being treated at home for asthma attacks and that these became very severe. She should then have been admitted to hospital but she might have refused. She could then have died. Dr Grenville's second possible explanation is that Mrs Jones had irreversible lung disease, which made her vulnerable to a chest infection. When she developed an infection, Shipman might have chosen to treat her at home with antibiotics. The infection might have suddenly overwhelmed her. The only basis on which he can suggest a possible contribution from an injection of opiate is that if one were given while Mrs Jones was very ill with a respiratory infection, the effect might have been to reduce her respiratory drive and her ability to fight off the infection.
Conclusion
In the absence of medical records, it is very difficult to form any reliable view of the circumstances of Mrs Jones' death. I regret to say that I do not find Mrs Foden a reliable witness. Where it has been possible to make a check on her recollection, it has been found that she is not always right. I am, for example, quite satisfied that Shipman visited Mrs Jones on 9th
and 10th
as well as on Monday, 8th
July. I am also satisfied that Mrs Jones had been unwell for some days before 8th
July and that Shipman had visited on 4th
and 6th
July. It follows that I do not accept that Mrs Jones was well until she developed some breathlessness on Monday, 8th
July. These matters reveal important inaccuracies in Mrs Foden's evidence. I cannot rely on her account of the events of the Monday afternoon. I regret to add that I think that Mrs Foden's account has been coloured by her strong dislike of Shipman. Whether that dislike is justified is not for me to say. I believe it has affected her view of him and she has persuaded herself that he was responsible for her mother's death.
I regret that I will be unable to reach any conclusion in this case. The circumstances are not sufficiently clear. In the absence of the medical records, I cannot have confidence in Mrs Foden's assertion that her mother was reasonably well until 8th
July. Nor am I confident in the accuracy of Mrs Foden's account of the events of that day or the two succeeding days.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001