The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Nancy Jackson
Introduction
Mrs Nancy Jackson died at her home, Flat 1 Gower Court, King Edward Road, Hyde on Monday, 1st
September 1997 at the age of 81. She had probably been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
Mrs Jackson's death came to the attention of the police during the course of their investigation into the death of Mrs Bertha Parr. When he was interviewed by the police in connection with his mother's death, Mr Barrie Parr said that he had discovered Mrs Jackson's dead body in circumstances that he thought suspicious. The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs Jackson's death was one of a number recovered by the police from the register office in August 1998 and, after a preliminary assessment, it was decided that enquiries should be made into the death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Rosalind Drew, formerly Mrs Rosalind Farrell (Mrs Jackson's daughter), Mrs Linda Ann Jackson (Mrs Jackson's daughter-in-law) and Mrs Doris Robinson, Mr Parr and his wife Mrs Susan Parr (Mrs Jackson's friends and neighbours). The police also took statements from Dr John Grenville and Dr Surinder Kalra.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Jackson but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mrs Drew, Mrs Linda Jackson and Mr Parr. The Inquiry has also taken a statement from Mr David Martin Jackson (Mrs Jackson's son) and Ms Eleanor Adams (a friend of Mrs Jackson). The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Jackson's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the documents and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Jackson had been a widow for many years and lived on her own. She has been described by her family and friends as a woman with a strong constitution. She had been troubled by a hiatus hernia but was otherwise regarded as fit and active. She used to take her small dog for daily walks.
Her medical notes and records confirm the impression that she was a healthy woman. Dr Grenville, who has examined the records, says that Mrs Jackson had slightly elevated blood pressure, which was successfully controlled by a modest dose of medication. This condition was monitored regularly, usually by the practice nurse. In April 1997, a routine check showed slight deterioration of kidney function.
During the last two weeks of her life, Mrs Jackson was not well. Her illness began as a cold. On Bank Holiday Monday, 25th
August 1997, Mrs Jackson telephoned her daughter, Mrs Drew, to say that she had a bad cold and was not well. Mrs Drew went to her mother's flat and found her to be quite ill. She seemed feverish and complained of a cough and difficulty in swallowing. Mrs Drew telephoned for the emergency doctor. Dr Kalra attended and found that Mrs Jackson had a mild temperature, a sore throat and some congestion in her throat. He diagnosed an upper respiratory tract infection and prescribed a course of antibiotics and a tonic. He also instructed Mrs Jackson to take paracetamol as and when required and stressed to her that, if her symptoms did not improve or if she suddenly felt very ill, then she should either make an appointment to see her own doctor or call for an ambulance.
Mrs Drew arranged to stay with her mother until she was better. She told the Inquiry that, over the next day or two, her mother seemed very depressed. She was talking about wanting to change her will. She repeatedly asked to see Shipman. Mrs Drew assured her mother that this would not be necessary as she had her medication. Mrs Jackson said that she did not like the tablets Dr Kalra had prescribed because they were too big to swallow. Eventually, Mrs Drew asked Shipman to visit. That was probably on the morning of Wednesday, 27th
August. The following entry appears in the practice visits book that day:
'Nancy Jackson, Flat 1, Gower Court, King Ed Rd. Hyde = still has high temp, confused, runs, not eating well. Wants to see you = talks about going into hosp per daughter'.
The medical notes and records also indicate that Shipman attended on 27th
August 1997. According to the computerised note, Shipman diagnosed a chest infection and noted that Mrs Jackson was suffering from a fever and had a cough. She also had some rhonchi (abnormal lung sounds) and aches and pains. There is no record of this visit on the Lloyd George cards.
There is a note, in Shipman's hand, written on the back of the visit request slip dated 27th
August 1997, which reads as follows:
'Loss of appetite Diarrhoea 2/7
Cough sore throat.
Chest infection RUL
Amoxil'.
The letters 'RUL', meaning 'right upper lobe', appear to have been written in different ink from the remainder of the note and were probably added later.
There are several other notes on the back of that slip. It is not possible to tell in what order they were written. One of them suggests that the receptionist, Mrs Carol Chapman, should arrange or had arranged a domiciliary visit, presumably by a consultant physician, probably from the Department of Geriatric Medicine at Tameside General Hospital. This note appears to have been written in similar ink to the letters 'RUL'.
Another note written on the back of the slip, this time in red ballpoint pen, reads:
'MONDAY BLOODS'
.
A fourth note reads:
'FRI'
and is underlined. The fifth note, in black ink, reads
'Farrell'
. A telephone number is recorded in blue ballpoint pen. Farrell was Mrs Drew's surname in 1997.
It appears that, on Wednesday, 27th
August, Shipman prescribed a course of a different antibiotic. Mrs Drew remembers that he also threw away the tonic prescribed by Dr Kalra, as it was of no use.
Shipman returned to see Mrs Jackson on Friday, 29th
August. The practice visits book confirms an intention to revisit. Mrs Drew, who was present at both consultations with Shipman that week, remembers that he said that he would take blood samples the following week if Mrs Jackson's condition did not improve. She recalls that her mother was anxious that this should be done, as she wanted to find out what was the matter with her.
According to Mrs Drew, by the Friday, her mother was improved, although she still seemed depressed. Mrs Drew did not think that her mother was well enough to stay at home by herself. Shipman, however, insisted that Mrs Jackson was better. He was quite abrupt with Mrs Drew and told her that she should go back home, because her mother did not need her assistance. Mrs Drew was anxious to return home but did not feel able to take her mother with her. The stairs of her house were very steep. Mrs Drew thought her mother ought not to be alone. She asked Shipman whether it would be possible for her mother to be admitted to a home until she was better, but Shipman said she was not ill enough for that. Mrs Drew's recollection is largely confirmed by the entry Shipman made in the computerised medical records for that day:
'Patient reviewed
still some diarhoea
(
sic
)
?eph
(
elderly persons' home
)
for rest
Seen in own home
Dr H F Shipman'
.
Mrs Drew stayed with her mother until about 7pm on Sunday, 31st
August. By the time she left her mother, she really was much better, although she was still depressed. Shipman had mentioned that he would visit Mrs Jackson on the Monday to take some blood if she was still not feeling better. Mrs Drew thought her mother would be all right on her own for that one day.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Drew telephoned her mother at about 11am on 1st
September 1997. Mrs Jackson said that she was 'fine' and that her friend, Mrs Robinson, was with her. She said that she did not have time to speak because she was making tea and that she would ring back later that afternoon. Mrs Robinson told the police that she left Mrs Jackson at about noon. She had been with her for two hours during which time Mrs Jackson appeared quite well. According to Mrs Linda Jackson, Mrs Robinson told her that she had seen Mrs Jackson walking her dog that morning of her death. However, Mrs Robinson did not mention this in her police statement and it has not been possible to check the accuracy of that report as Mrs Robinson has since died.
The practice visits book contains the following entry for 1st
September 1997:
'NANCY JACKSON - BLOODS'
.
Mrs Jackson's computerised medical records contain four entries for 1st
September 1997. The first two read as follows:
'Examination of patient
rul pneumonia night sweats feel better eating more energy
rul creps rhonchi chat have a D/V geriatrics allow out into
sunshine'
.
Dr Grenville said that Shipman's note clearly describes right upper lobe pneumonia, although it also suggests that Mrs Jackson was feeling a little better. Dr Grenville explained that right upper lobe pneumonia can be fatal in elderly people.
The time of Shipman's visit that day is not clear. According to Mrs Robinson's police witness statement, Shipman was seen to visit Mrs Jackson by her neighbours Mr and Mrs White at about 2.20pm on the day of her death. When the police spoke to Mr and Mrs White, however, they denied this was the case. Mrs White told the police that she had heard the communal doors to the flats bang and that she had seen a red vehicle on the street but she could not recall at what time this was. It seems to me that Shipman probably visited at about 2pm and was back in the surgery at about 2.15pm, when he asked Mrs Chapman to arrange a domiciliary visit for Mrs Jackson. It appears that the request for a domiciliary visit, referred to on the back of the visits form, was probably made when Shipman returned to the surgery after this visit. One of computerised entries made on this day says:
'Domiciliary visit requested'
.
I note that the visit was cancelled as the patient died before it had taken place.
Mrs Jackson did not telephone her daughter that afternoon. Mrs Drew was out between 3.30pm and 5pm. She then began to telephone her mother and, when she had been unable to make contact by 6.15pm, she telephoned Mrs Robinson and asked her to go round to check. Mrs Robinson called in on Mr Parr, who had a spare key to Mrs Jackson's flat. They entered the flat and discovered that Mrs Jackson had died. They found her sitting upright on the sofa in the living room. There was a copy of the
TV Times
next to her. She was fully clothed. Her left arm was resting on her left knee and she was holding her glasses in her right hand, which was resting on her right knee. Her head was leaning against the back of the settee. Her dog was sitting in the room and appeared to be quite nervous. Mr Parr telephoned for an ambulance. The call was received at 7.32pm. The paramedics arrived at 7.42pm and diagnosed death at 7.45pm. The form completed by the paramedics says:
'Patient found code 1
Rigor mortice
(
sic
)
present
Not seen since 11.30 hrs'
.
Mrs Robinson telephoned Mrs Drew, who said she would come immediately. As Mr Parr and Mrs Robinson were waiting for the ambulance to arrive, Mrs Linda Jackson telephoned the house and was given the news. She too said she would attend. Someone also contacted Shipman's surgery. The call was put through to the deputising service. In due course Shipman himself attended.
When Shipman arrived, Mrs Linda Jackson was already at the house. She says that he seemed relaxed and calm and not surprised at what had happened. He said something like, 'There she was slipping away before our eyes and none of us noticed'. Mrs Linda Jackson does not recall Shipman examining Mrs Jackson.
By the time Mrs Drew arrived Shipman had gone. Mrs Drew was amazed that her mother had been found sitting on the settee because she never used it. She recalls that Mrs Robinson told her that, while Shipman was at the house, the question was raised as to who had last seen Mrs Jackson alive. Apparently, Shipman had said that it was Mrs Robinson. Mrs Robinson, however, corrected him on this and pointed out that
he
was the last person to see Mrs Jackson alive. Shipman then admitted that he had been to see Mrs Jackson that afternoon. Mrs Robinson did not mention this in her police statement.
Shipman recorded the fact of the death very briefly:
'O/E - dead
death 1800 hrs cert 2045 old age'
.
I infer from this entry that Shipman was saying that, when he certified Mrs Jackson as dead at 8.45pm, he considered that the death had occurred at 6pm and that the cause of death was old age.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). He said that the death was due to old age. He said that he had last seen Mrs Jackson alive on the day of her death. He said that a post-mortem examination would not be held.
He also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Jackson had died at about 6pm on 1st September 1997. He said that he had been her ordinary medical attendant for 20 years. He had attended her during her last illness for a period of two weeks. He stated that he last saw Mrs Jackson alive about four hours before her death, which on his timings would be at about 2pm. He said that he saw the body about three hours after death, which would have been at about 9pm. He claimed that he had made a complete external examination. He said that the mode of death was
'coma'
of
'hours'
duration. In response to question 11, which asks to what extent the information given about the cause and mode of death was based on his own observations or on statements made by others, Shipman wrote:
'found by neighbour who saw her 1 hour before, dead'
. Thus, according to Form B, a neighbour had apparently seen Mrs Jackson in a coma, had done nothing and had then 'found' her dead one hour later.
The Aftermath
Following Mrs Jackson's death, the family discovered that two items of her personal jewellery were missing.
It appears that Shipman must have taken blood samples on 1st
September. The results were recorded in the computerised records on 2nd
September 1997. According to Dr Grenville, the renal function tests showed slight progression since the April results and were not worrying. The liver function tests were abnormal and, in Dr Grenville's view, this could be accounted for by a metabolic upset caused by the infection or could possibly relate to alcohol consumption. The blood glucose result was normal.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville said that the certified cause of death was not justified in this case. He had explained in his generic evidence that 'old age' is acceptable as a cause of death only where a very elderly patient has been ill for some considerable period of time, there has been multiple organ failure and the patient finally fades away. If the doctor is unsure which elements of the multi-organ failure were responsible for the death, it is acceptable to give 'old age' as the cause. Dr Grenville said that Mrs Jackson did not fall into this category. She had been ill for only just over a week. She was significantly better by the Friday before her death and was well enough to be left alone by the Sunday. She was up and dressed on the morning of the day of her death. In Dr Grenville's view, Mrs Jackson did not die of old age. Nor in Dr Grenville's view did Mrs Jackson die of right upper lobe pneumonia. If she had that condition, she would have been extremely ill just before death. It seems to me that, if Mrs Jackson died of lobar pneumonia at 6pm, the time of death suggested by Shipman, she would have been very poorly when he visited at about 2pm and he would not have been able to leave her unattended. If she had been feeling ill in the afternoon, she would have telephoned her daughter or daughter-in-law or her neighbour.
Conclusion
There are highly suspicious circumstances surrounding this death.
Mrs Jackson was found dead shortly after a visit by Shipman. No one saw Mrs Jackson alive or spoke to her after that visit. The witness evidence suggests strongly that Shipman was the last person to see her alive. That, in itself, excites great suspicion.
Shipman lied on Form B. He said that Mrs Jackson was found dead by a neighbour who had seen her alive one hour beforehand. I am sure that is a lie. I am sure that if any neighbour had seen Mrs Jackson alive at about 5pm, Mrs Drew and Mrs Linda Jackson would have been told and the Inquiry would have learned about it. This lie was important because Shipman was seeking to create the impression that someone had seen Mrs Jackson alive well after his own visit.
On the same form, Shipman said that the mode of death was a coma of hours' duration. That statement is inconsistent with the claim that a neighbour saw Mrs Jackson alive an hour before death. It is also quite hard to reconcile with Shipman's presence at the house at about 2pm. Mrs Jackson was not in a coma then. She was alone. Shipman seems to imply that a neighbour had come into the house, seen Mrs Jackson in a coma, gone away again, leaving her completely alone and returned an hour later to find her dead. This account is not credible and the entries should have excited the concern of the doctor who signed Form C of the cremation certificate and the medical referee.
Mrs Jackson had been ill in the week before her death. Both the witnesses' evidence and Shipman's notes suggest that by the Friday she was greatly improved. The witnesses say that the improvement continued into the Monday. Shipman's note of his consultation on the Monday is confusing. He suggests that Mrs Jackson has right upper lobe pneumonia but does not suggest that anything needs to be done about it as a matter of urgency. Rather the reverse; he seems to be suggesting that Mrs Jackson has improved. Yet on his return to the surgery, he instructed Mrs Chapman to arrange a domiciliary visit. I think he also added the letters 'RUL' to a note he had made on the back of the visits slip on an earlier occasion. I think Shipman's request to Mrs Chapman was a diversionary tactic, designed to give the impression that Mrs Jackson was alive but unwell and in need of a specialist opinion. I think Shipman well knew at this time that she was dead. Shipman used this device in at least two other cases, those of Mrs Hilda Couzens and Mrs Olive Heginbotham, who died on the same day in February 1993.
As explained above, Mrs Jackson was not in such a moribund state as would justify ascribing her death to 'old age'. It was quite unacceptable to certify that her death was due to old age. Mrs Jackson's death was sudden and unexplained and should have been referred to the coroner.
Mrs Jackson's appearance in death was very similar to that of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of diamorphine.
I am quite sure that Shipman killed Mrs Jackson. I think he almost certainly decided to do so on Friday, 27th
August. That is why he was anxious to ensure that Mrs Drew went back to her own home, leaving Mrs Jackson alone in the house. That is why he said he would call again on the Monday to take blood samples. Patients who were to provide blood samples were particularly vulnerable to Shipman, as many patients do not watch while a blood sample is taken and would not realise that Shipman was giving an injection rather than taking blood. I am sure Shipman took some blood samples and then gave Mrs Jackson an intravenous lethal injection of opiate, almost certainly diamorphine, which would have killed her within a few minutes. He then left her and returned to the surgery where he asked Mrs Chapman to make an appointment for a domiciliary visit. When he was called out to see the body, he made up a story about a neighbour seeing Mrs Jackson alive at about 5pm. This lie was designed to distance himself from the death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001