The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Maureen Lamonnier Jackson
Introduction
Mrs Maureen Lamonnier Jackson died at her home, 122 Mottram Road, Hyde on Monday, 7th
July 1997 at the age of 51. She had been a patient of Shipman since 1985. He certified that the cause of her death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the breast.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the police that he found the circumstances of Mrs Jackson's death moderately suspicious on the basis of the contents of the cremation documentation. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Alan Jackson (Mrs Jackson's husband), Mrs Florence Hall (Mrs Jackson's aunt), Nurse Marion Gilchrist and Nurse Ethel Dooley (district nurses), Ms Karen Barham (a pharmacist) and Ms Alison Massey (the Market Street practice manager).
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Jackson, but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Jackson, Mrs Hall, Nurse Gilchrist, Dr Wendy Phillippa Makin (a consultant in palliative care and oncology) and Dr John Grenville. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Jackson's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
At the time of her death, Mrs Jackson was living with her husband and eldest son. She had a ten year history of breast cancer. Mrs Jackson's mother died of cancer only 13 weeks before her own death.
In 1987, Mrs Jackson was found to have a carcinoma of the right breast. In November of that year, she underwent a mastectomy. She made a good recovery and remained well until December 1992 when she developed pain in her lower back and left chest wall. In 1993, she was found to be suffering from metastatic bone disease in the lumbar spine. This caused severe pain in the lower back and right thigh. In September 1993, Mrs Jackson underwent palliative radiotherapy at the Christie Hospital, which temporarily alleviated her pain. By December 1993, however, she had developed pain in the left sacroiliac joint. A subsequent x-ray of that region suggested a further lesion and she had another course of radiotherapy. The back pain persisted and a bone scan taken in May 1995 revealed widespread metastatic disease.
From August 1996 until June 1997 Mrs Jackson had chemotherapy. In September 1996 she was prescribed Fentanyl patches to control her pain. These provide a slowly released supply of analgesic. A Computerised Tomography (CT) brain scan, performed on 1st
May 1997, revealed no evidence of intracranial metastases. By June 1997 her pain was so severe that Shipman discontinued the Fentanyl patches and commenced treatment with a daily dose of 200mg diamorphine administered via a syringe driver.
Mrs Jackson's hospital notes record that on 25th
June 1997 her pain had worsened and the dosage of diamorphine was increased to 350mg per day. By July 1997, the dose was increased to 400mg. Nurse Gilchrist told the Inquiry that Mrs Jackson refused to have the dose increased any further.
Mr Jackson recalls that about two weeks before her death his wife asked Shipman for a prognosis. Shipman apparently told her that he would discuss this with her after Christmas. Mr Jackson interpreted this to mean that his wife would live until Christmas. At about this time Mrs Jackson was waiting to be admitted into the Christie Hospital for further palliative treatment.
The Day of the Death
At about 7.15am on 7th
July 1997, Mr Jackson left for work. He recalls that when he left his house his wife was no better or worse than was usual at that time. Mrs Jackson got up at about the same time and, after washing and brushing her teeth, she went back to bed. Mrs Hall, who used to attend the house regularly while Mr Jackson was at work, arrived at about 9am.
Mrs Hall went up to see Mrs Jackson in bed. They spoke for a short while. Although Mrs Jackson looked ill, she did not look obviously worse than usual. Mrs Hall did not consider Mrs Jackson to be close to death. Mrs Jackson told her aunt that she had been downstairs to watch television with the family the evening before. She said she had had a drink that morning. At about 10am, Mrs Jackson said that she wanted to sleep and Mrs Hall went downstairs.
Some time before lunch Shipman let himself into the house through the back door. According to Mrs Hall, Shipman used to visit Mrs Jackson on a regular basis and he would often let himself in. On this occasion, Shipman said that he was going upstairs to see Mrs Jackson and told Mrs Hall that there was no need for her to accompany him. Mrs Hall is not sure how long Shipman was with Mrs Jackson, although she thinks it was about 15 minutes. When he came down Shipman told Mrs Hall that Mrs Jackson did not look very well. He said that he thought something had happened to Mrs Jackson over the weekend and that she had possibly suffered a stroke. Shipman then said that he would go back upstairs and conduct a quick examination. Mrs Hall offered to go upstairs with Shipman but he refused. Shipman stayed longer with Mrs Jackson the second time and, when he eventually came downstairs, he informed Mrs Hall that Mrs Jackson had 'taken a turn for the worse'. He said he would contact Mr Jackson and tell him to come home.
Mr Jackson recalls receiving a telephone call at work from Shipman, who told him that his wife had had a stroke. He said that she was likely to have a further stroke within the next 24 to 48 hours and that this was likely to prove fatal. Shipman asked Mr Jackson to return home, but told him not to rush. Stunned, Mr Jackson drove home.
After telephoning Mr Jackson, Shipman told Mrs Hall that he had a couple more visits to make and that he would call back later. Mrs Hall asked Shipman whether Mrs Jackson would die soon, to which Shipman replied, 'Oh no, it'll be a week or two weeks'. She also asked whether she should go upstairs and stay with Mrs Jackson but Shipman said, 'Oh no, she's resting now, let her sleep'. He left at about 2pm and Mrs Hall continued with the ironing.
Nurse Gilchrist arrived at the Jacksons' house at about 2.30pm. She went upstairs and knocked on Mrs Jackson's bedroom door. There was no reply. She went in and saw Mrs Jackson in bed, lying on her side, facing the window. She was dead. Nurse Gilchrist says that she must have checked Mrs Jackson's pulse, but cannot specifically recall doing so. She cannot recall whether Mrs Jackson was cold or warm. Nor can she recall the colour of her skin. Nurse Gilchrist went downstairs and told Mrs Hall of the death. Mrs Hall was extremely upset. Nurse Gilchrist telephoned Shipman's surgery and asked the receptionist to contact him.
It was not long before Shipman returned. He looked surprised to see Nurse Gilchrist. He did not mention to her that Mrs Jackson had suffered a stroke earlier that day. After he had been upstairs, Shipman told Nurse Gilchrist that the remaining diamorphine should be destroyed. Nurse Gilchrist recalls breaking open the ampoules of diamorphine and emptying them into a 'burn bin', together with Shipman. Nurse Gilchrist later took the burn bin and the syringe driver to Dewsnap Clinic for disposal. Mrs Jackson's patient drug record card indicates that Shipman destroyed the unused diamorphine.
On his arrival at home, Mr Jackson was told that his wife had died. He was completely shocked and was left speechless. Although he was expecting to find his wife ill, he thought that she would still be alive. Upstairs, he found his wife lying on her back in bed. It may be that by this time someone had laid her in that position. To Mr Jackson it appeared that she was sleeping. Mr Jackson touched her face, which was cold. Her lips were blue and her skin was tinged with blue.
Mr Jackson could not understand how his wife had died so quickly and he asked Shipman what had happened. Shipman, who did not appear his usual confident self, said that Mrs Jackson had suffered a massive stroke as a result of the cancer.
Shipman's handwritten note for 7th
July 1997 reads:
'Very twitchy
Pupils small diamorphine
power
L>R tone
plantar (L)
(R)
Speech slurred
Very tired
circulation poor
getting to toilet
Pupil: (R) Disc? flat ? papilloedema
D - (R) CVA
? 2 º in brain
Aunt present'
.
This note suggests that he had observed signs indicative of a stroke. He seems to be wondering whether the stroke might have been caused by a secondary cancer in the brain. Dr Grenville says that it is highly unlikely that Mrs Jackson had developed metastases of any size in her brain by this time, as none had been seen on the CT scan on 1st
May. Dr Makin says that this is not at all probable. Shipman's description of an evolving stroke is completely at odds with the family's recollection of Mrs Jackson's condition on the morning of the day of her death.
In this note, Shipman also claims to have been able to see Mrs Jackson's right optic disc and to have seen that it was flat, indicating swelling of the nerves at the back of the eye (papilloedema) which would suggest raised pressure within the brain due to a secondary tumour. Dr Makin is sceptical of Shipman's claim to have been able to see the optic disc. As Mrs Jackson was taking quite large daily doses of diamorphine, her pupils would have been very small and it would be very difficult to see the disc. Shining a light in the patient's eye would only serve to constrict the pupils further.
Nurse Gilchrist told the Inquiry that Mrs Jackson's death did not come as a surprise to her because her illness had reached the stage when she might have deteriorated over a matter of days or even hours. Dr Makin told the Inquiry that, although Mrs Jackson was seriously ill with cancer when she last saw her on 25th
June 1997, she did not expect her death to occur so soon afterwards. Had she thought the death would occur so soon, she would not have made arrangements for any further palliative treatment. She says that it is usually possible to predict the pattern of a patient's decline towards death, although on occasion the unexpected can and does happen. There was nothing within Mrs Jackson's history to suggest that her death was imminent. She was surprised at the death. Having read the witness evidence, she thinks perhaps Nurse Gilchrist may have been confusing the effects of Mrs Jackson's illness with the debilitating effects of her opiate analgesia. Dr Makin expressed scepticism about Shipman's diagnosis of a stroke.
Certification
On the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), Shipman confirmed that he had last seen Mrs Jackson alive on the day of her death. He said that the death was due to carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the breast. He said nothing about a stroke or a secondary tumour in the brain.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Jackson's death had occurred at 2.40pm on 7th
July 1997. He said that he had attended Mrs Jackson during her last illness for a period of five years and that he last saw her alive one hour before her death. He said that he saw and made a complete external examination of her body about 15 minutes after her death. The causes of death were as stated on the MCCD. Shipman said that the mode of death was a coma lasting minutes. When asked to what extent his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others, he wrote:
'D/N Gilchrist
Mrs Jackson's aunt'
.
Shipman also stated that Nurse Gilchrist and Mrs Jackson's aunt were present at the moment of death. If their evidence is correct, it is hard to see how either Nurse Gilchrist or Mrs Hall were in any position to supply information to Shipman over and above that which was already known to him. They were not present at the death.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville told the Inquiry that the dosage of diamorphine that Mrs Jackson was receiving via the syringe driver was appropriate for her condition. In his opinion, Mrs Jackson's care during her terminal illness appears to have been appropriate until the day of her death.
Dr Grenville regards it as highly unlikely that Mrs Jackson had developed a secondary tumour in the brain of any significant size by 7th
July. The CT scan of the brain taken on 1st
May 1997 had revealed no sign of intracranial metastases. Moreover, as Mrs Jackson did not appear to either Mr Jackson or to Mrs Hall to have any new symptoms on the morning of 7th
July, Dr Grenville thinks it is highly unlikely that Mrs Jackson had any of the signs described by Shipman in his medical note. I accept that opinion and consider that the medical note was fabricated.
Dr Grenville observes that the timing of events is entirely consistent with Shipman having given a lethal dose of diamorphine when he visited Mrs Jackson on 7th
July. He says that the dose must have been very large indeed (of the order of 500 to 1000mg) as Mrs Jackson was already taking a large daily dose through her syringe driver.
Dr Grenville adds that if Shipman did inject Mrs Jackson with a lethal dose of diamorphine then it probably hastened her inevitable death by a matter of weeks. He thinks it unlikely that she would have survived until Christmas.
Professor Baker thought the death moderately suspicious on the basis of the information contained in the cremation documentation.
The Drugs
The Controlled Drugs Register of the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy shows that a prescription in Mrs Jackson's name was presented on 3rd
July 1997. Shipman collected 20 ampoules containing 100mg and 30 ampoules containing 10mg diamorphine which were dispensed by the pharmacy. According to Nurse Gilchrist, Shipman delivered 15 ampoules each containing 100mg diamorphine. He must therefore have kept back five ampoules of 100mg and 30 ampoules of 10mg.
Nurse Gilchrist says that her record of Mrs Jackson's stock of diamorphine was correct after her death. Shipman had not taken anything from it. However, Nurse Gilchrist would not have known that a much larger amount had been collected by Shipman on 3rd
July than he delivered to Mrs Jackson's home.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Shipman killed Mrs Jackson on 7th
July. She was terminally ill but her death was not expected for some time. The circumstances of her death are entirely consistent with the administration of a large dose of diamorphine. Shipman engineered an opportunity to be alone with Mrs Jackson when he visited, and discouraged Mrs Hall from going to the bedroom when he left.
Shipman had retained 800mg diamorphine belonging to Mrs Jackson on 3rd
July. I am quite sure that he used some or all of that to kill her four days later. His explanation for the death is highly implausible and is inconsistent with the witness evidence of Mrs Jackson's condition on the morning of the day of her death. His medical note of that day was fabricated to support his implausible suggestion that Mrs Jackson had suffered a stroke. However, he did not mention this when completing the MCCD and Form B. Shipman lied on Form B in stating that Nurse Gilchrist and Mrs Hall were present at the moment of death. Everything points to the conclusion that Shipman killed Mrs Jackson.
It is true that Mrs Jackson did not have long to live. Shipman might have justified his actions to himself on the ground that he had saved her from further suffering. However, he also deprived Mrs Jackson and her family of their chance to prepare for the death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001