The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Jane Jones
Introduction
Mrs Jane Jones (also known as Jinney) died at her home, 2 Leigh Fold, Hyde on Monday, 15th
February 1988 at the age of 83. She was a widow and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was respiratory failure.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the information contained in the cremation certificate, the death of Mrs Jones was highly suspicious. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr George Jones (Mrs Jones' son) and Mrs Vera Panther (Mrs Jones' niece). An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mr Jones and Mrs Panther. The general practitioner records have not survived but the Inquiry has had access to the cremation documents, the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and Shipman's visits book for 1988.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Jones and Mrs Panther both say that Mrs Jones enjoyed good health, apart from suffering intermittent back pain. She was a very active member of The Pensioners House and, until at least 1986, she used to cook meals for other pensioners. At that time, her son persuaded her to give up cooking for others. However, she was still able to do her own shopping, housework and cooking. She was taken into Hyde once a week for her main shopping and could go alone to her local shops for small items. Mrs Panther saw Mrs Jones every day and Mr Jones would call on his mother after work on every working day. He worked a shift, which sometimes included weekend working.
Mr Jones says that his mother was very careful about the security of her house. A year or so before her death, she had been sexually assaulted and this had made her rather nervous.
Mr Jones believes that Shipman called on his mother quite frequently to see how she was. It is possible that he did, although the visits book reveals only two visits between 1st
November 1987 and the date of death. These were on 8th
and 23rd
December 1987. The visits book does not reveal the purpose of either visit.
Mr Jones last saw his mother alive on Sunday, 14th
February 1988. He is unsure about the time of his visit. He recalls that his mother had a cold and cough and was 'a bit chesty'. She was dressed when he saw her and he stayed with her for about 20 minutes. He does not remember that she asked him to call Shipman out to see her. She could not do this herself, as she had no telephone in the house. Mr Jones was not worried about his mother's condition when he left.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Panther last saw Mrs Jones at 10.30am on 15th
February 1998, when she briefly called on her on her way to the shops. Mrs Jones was still in her nightdress and cardigan. Mrs Panther told the Inquiry that Mrs Jones said that she had a cold and felt 'a bit chesty'. She sounded wheezy and 'blocked up'. Her breathing was slightly harder than usual, although she was not fighting for breath. Mrs Panther told the police that her aunt did not appear to have any breathing or other problems, although she did have a cold. She told the Inquiry that Mrs Jones said that she had asked her son to send for the doctor because she wanted some antibiotics for her cold. Mrs Panther was not worried about her aunt's condition when she left.
Mrs Panther returned home from shopping between noon and 12.45pm. Shortly afterwards, Shipman arrived and said that he had been to see Mrs Jones, who had answered her door in a state of virtual collapse. Shipman said that he did not know how she had managed to reach the front door. He explained that he had helped her into her bedroom and had given her an injection to help her breathing. He added that she was very poorly and asked Mrs Panther to accompany him back to the house.
Mrs Panther immediately ran to her aunt's house and arrived before Shipman. She entered the house through the open front door and went into Mrs Jones' bedroom. She went over to her aunt, whom she could see was propped up on pillows, with the bedclothes pulled up to her waist. Her left hand was resting in her lap and her right arm was by her side with the forearm exposed. Mrs Panther recalls that, as she reached the bedside, her aunt seemed to push herself forward slightly and then let out a gasp, following which her mouth dropped open. Mrs Panther thought that her aunt had just died. Shipman made no attempt to revive Mrs Jones. He did not call an ambulance nor did he call the police. He felt for a pulse then put his hand under Mrs Jones' chin and closed her mouth.
Mrs Panther was very distressed. Shipman shouted at her and told her to pull herself together. He then left to return to his surgery. Mrs Panther estimates that Shipman was in the house for a period of about five minutes. She contacted Mr Jones who then attended at his mother's house.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD, certifying that the death was due to respiratory failure. From the counterfoil, it can be seen that he said that he had last seen Mrs Jones alive on the day of her death. The case was not to be referred to the coroner.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that death had occurred at
'13.30 hours'
. He said that he was Mrs Jones' ordinary medical attendant and had attended her during her last illness for
'over six months'
. He said he had last seen Mrs Jones alive
'10 minutes or so'
before her death and immediately after her death when he made a complete external examination of the body. The cause of death was respiratory failure. The mode of death was said to be syncope of only minutes' duration. The answers as to cause and mode of death were said to be made on the basis of his own observations and those of Mrs Jones' daughter-in-law. This would appear to be an intended reference to Mrs Panther, Mrs Jones' niece. Mrs Jones is recorded as having been nursed during her last illness by her son and daughter-in-law. It is recorded that nobody was present at the moment of death. Mrs Panther disagrees with this and has told the Inquiry that her aunt was definitely still alive when she entered the bedroom.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Baker has considered the case and, on his assessment of the cremation documentation, concluded that Mrs Jones' death is highly suspicious.
Conclusion
There are some suspicious circumstances surrounding this death.
Although the medical records have not been found, it appears from the witness evidence that Mrs Jones was in relatively good health at 10.30am on the day of her death and yet, just over two hours later and within minutes after Shipman had visited her, she was dead. In giving his evidence in relation to the death of Mrs Beatrice Toft, Dr John Grenville provided a useful description of the likely pattern of events prior to a death caused by respiratory failure. He described a long, slow period of deterioration, perhaps over a period of weeks, leading to a patient becoming bed bound or chair bound, requiring either nursing care or admission to a hospital or nursing home. Often the patient would need to use an oxygen cylinder. The patient would become increasingly short of breath. In the later stages, it would be difficult for the patient to draw enough breath to speak more than a few words. Eventually the patient would lapse into unconsciousness due to hypoxia. This description does not accord with the evidence in this case. Mrs Jones was living alone and was not receiving nursing care. She had been talking to her niece only about two hours before her death. If Mrs Jones had been suffering from severe respiratory illness, such as might lead to death within days, one would have expected Shipman to be visiting her frequently. He was not. In my view, Shipman's certification as to the cause of Mrs Jones' death must be in real doubt. This was a sudden and unexplained death, which should have been referred to the coroner.
Shipman admitted that he had given Mrs Jones an injection, supposedly for her breathing difficulties. In the absence of the medical records, I cannot say whether he gave a drug that was or might have been appropriate treatment. However, there must be a real possibility that Shipman gave Mrs Jones an injection of strong opiate.
Shipman's conduct does not make sense. If he had really found Mrs Jones in a state of respiratory collapse, one would have expected him to call an ambulance and try to have her admitted to hospital as soon as possible. Instead, he left her alone and went to Mrs Panther's house, supposedly to fetch her to come and help. What Mrs Panther could usefully have done, if this was a real emergency, is hard to imagine. Shipman quite often left a body or a dying patient and enlisted the 'help' of a relative or neighbour who would be present when the death was 'discovered'. I think it likely that Shipman went to fetch Mrs Panther so that he would be able to involve her in the discovery of the death.
I am puzzled by Mrs Panther's assertion that her aunt was still alive when she entered the bedroom. If Shipman had given a lethal injection of diamorphine (his preferred method of killing) before he went to fetch Mrs Panther, I would have expected Mrs Jones to have died before Mrs Panther arrived. Usually, Shipman ensured that his murdered patients were already dead when his 'helper' arrived on the scene. Moreover, it would be very strange for Shipman to say that no one was present at the death if in fact Mrs Panther had arrived in time to witness the moment of death. I do wonder whether Mrs Panther's recollection is correct in this respect and think perhaps that she has misconstrued the exhalation of air. It is possible that Mrs Jones' body moved slightly and some air was expressed from the lungs as a result.
Shipman told at least one lie on Form B. He claimed that Mrs Jones had been nursed during her last illness. If Mrs Jones had died of respiratory failure, she would have needed nursing care. Shipman would have wished to give the impression that this death was not sudden or unexpected.
Mrs Jones' appearance in death was very similar to that of some of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of opiate. She was found sitting upright in bed, propped up on her pillows. The bed covers were pulled up to her waist with her left arm resting in her lap and her right arm by her side with the forearm exposed.
Mrs Jones had not declined gradually towards a death from respiratory failure but died quite suddenly. That sudden death occurred during a visit by Shipman. It seems to me that it is highly likely that she died as the result of a lethal injection of opiate. It would be so remarkable a coincidence that she should suddenly die naturally of some other cause during a visit by Shipman that I discount that possibility as fanciful. I am driven to the conclusion that Shipman killed Mrs Jones.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001