The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Alice Mary Jones
Introduction
Mrs Alice Mary Jones died at her home, 67 Garden Street, Hyde on Friday, 15th
January 1988 at the age of 83. She had been a patient of Shipman, probably since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the information contained in the cremation certificate, the death of Mrs Jones was highly suspicious. The police took a statement from Mrs Annie Allen, Mrs Jones' sister-in-law. An inquest into Mrs Jones' death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Allen and has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1988. The medical records have not survived.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Jones was a widow and lived alone. She suffered from arthritis but her mobility was not greatly affected and she remained largely independent. Her eyesight was very poor and she found shopping difficult. Mrs Allen used to do her sister-in-law's shopping twice a week, usually on Wednesdays and Fridays. She would telephone Mrs Jones at about 9.30am to ask her what she wanted and would call at her house at about 1pm to leave the shopping.
Mrs Allen last saw Mrs Jones alive two days before she died, which was Wednesday, 13th
January 1988. When she dropped the shopping off, Mrs Jones seemed well and, during the short time they spent together that day, Mrs Jones did not mention that the doctor had visited or that she was expecting the doctor to visit.
Mrs Jones' name appears in Shipman's visits book for Tuesday, 12th
January and for Thursday, 14th
January, as well as the day of her death, Friday, 15th
January. Prior to that week, Mrs Jones' name last appeared in the visits book on 9th
November 1987. Thus, it appears that Mrs Jones must have been suffering from some ailment for which she requested at least one visit during the week beginning 11th
January 1988, and which had resulted in Shipman visiting on two further occasions.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Allen telephoned her sister-in-law as usual some time after 9am, to ask her what she needed from the shops. Mrs Allen recalls that she sounded well and did not mention that she was ill or that she was expecting the doctor to call.
Mrs Allen says that she arrived at Mrs Jones' house at some time between noon and 1pm. In her statement to the police, she said that she arrived at 12.50pm. The front door was slightly ajar, which was unusual, as Mrs Jones was security conscious and very particular about locking the door. Mrs Allen had never known the door to be unlocked on any of her twice weekly visits. Mrs Jones had never been willing to give Mrs Allen a key.
Mrs Allen went into the living room and found Mrs Jones sitting on the settee with a book on her lap. In one hand she was holding a torch and in the other a magnifying glass, which she used for reading. She had the outward appearance of being asleep and Mrs Allen went to her and attempted to rouse her. Mrs Allen remembers that she still felt warm. There was no response so Mrs Allen went next door to speak to a neighbour, who came back to the house with her and confirmed that Mrs Jones had died. Mrs Allen telephoned the surgery and the receptionist advised her to telephone for an ambulance. This she did and an ambulance arrived five to ten minutes later. The paramedics confirmed that Mrs Jones had died and said that, because the cause of death was unclear, a post-mortem examination would be requested. At that point, Shipman arrived at the house and said that he had seen Mrs Jones at 11am that morning and could therefore issue a death certificate. Upon hearing that, the paramedics left.
Mrs Allen had never met Shipman before. She recalls that he was slightly abrupt but otherwise did not notice anything unusual about him. He filled out a certificate while he was at the house. This must have been the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD).
Certification
The MCCD has not been recovered, but the counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. It records that Shipman last saw Mrs Jones alive on the day of her death, that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that he had seen the body after death. Although the date of the document is not entirely clear, it appears to be 15th
January 1988, which would accord with Mrs Allen's recollection that Shipman did complete the MCCD at the house. The cause of death was said to be cerebrovascular accident.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He recorded the time of death as
'12 noon'
. He said that he had attended Mrs Jones for a period of three days during her last illness. He said he had last seen her alive one and a half hours before death, and about one and a half hours after. He said that he had performed a complete external examination of the body. Mrs Allen says that Shipman did not examine Mrs Jones in any way and did not even touch her body. The cause of death was said to be cerebrovascular accident. The mode of death was recorded to be syncope lasting seconds. Shipman said that his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations. He said that no one had nursed Mrs Jones during her last illness and no one was present at the moment of death.
Conclusion
There are several suspicious features surrounding this death. The first and most obvious is that the death was discovered very shortly after Shipman had visited. Mrs Jones was not obviously unwell when Mrs Allen spoke to her on the telephone that morning, yet she was found dead within a short time after Shipman's visit. It would be a coincidence if Mrs Jones died a natural death shortly after his departure. 'Coincidences' of this kind seemed to occur frequently in Shipman's professional life. My view is that they were not coincidences at all. The temporal connection between Shipman's visit and Mrs Jones' death gives rise to a high degree of suspicion that Mrs Jones was dead when Shipman left her. The fact that the front door was not locked when Mrs Allen arrived confirms my suspicions. It appears to me that the probable reason for the unlocked door was that Mrs Jones was unable to see Shipman out and lock it after him.
Little is known about Mrs Jones' medical history. Mrs Allen was unaware that her sister-in-law was suffering any illness in the days leading up to her death. She says that had Mrs Jones been unwell, she would have mentioned her illness. However, it does appear that Shipman visited Mrs Jones twice in the week before her death and I infer that Mrs Jones must have had some medical problem, which Mrs Allen has forgotten about. Having said that, I do not think this could have been a serious or life-threatening illness. If it had been, I think Mrs Allen would have remembered it. Shipman said on Form B that he had attended Mrs Jones for three days during her last illness. As he claimed that she died of cerebrovascular accident, he seems to be suggesting a stroke, which developed over a period of three days. However, that is not consistent with either Mrs Allen's recollection or Shipman's assertion that no one had nursed Mrs Jones during her last illness. It is possible that Mrs Jones could have had one stroke three days before her death and another on the day of the death, but I think Mrs Allen would have remembered if Mrs Jones had had a stroke a few days before her death. In any event, if she had had a stroke, which did not warrant admission to hospital or nursing care at home, some one would have had to look after her and Mrs Allen would have been aware of the situation. I conclude that the picture Shipman sought to present does not ring true and that the likelihood is that Mrs Jones had a minor illness, which Shipman turned into an opportunity to kill her. He then invented the history of stroke to explain the death.
Mrs Jones' position and appearance after death was not typical of that usually seen following a sudden death from cerebrovascular accident, as Dr John Grenville has explained in his generic evidence. However, her position was typical of that of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by a lethal intravenous injection of opiate. That she should have had a torch in one hand and a magnifying glass in the other is not typical of a Shipman killing. However, it is hard to imagine that Mrs Jones could have had a sudden fatal stroke and yet have kept her torch and magnifying glass in her hands. It seems to me that the most likely explanation for these unusual features is that Shipman put these items in position when Mrs Jones had had her injection and was lapsing into unconsciousness.
This case carries Shipman's hallmark. Despite the loss of the medical records, I feel able to say that I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Jones, almost certainly by giving a lethal injection of strong opiate.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001