The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Robert Edward Jones
Introduction
Mr Robert Edward Jones died at his home, 26 Princess Street, Hyde on Monday, 6th
April 1987 at the age of 81. He was married and lived with his wife, Mrs May Jones. Form B of the cremation certificate states that Mr Jones had been a patient of Shipman since 1978. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was cerebrovascular accident due to cerebral arteriosclerosis.
In March 2001, the police decided to investigate the death because Professor Richard Baker had formed the view, on the basis of the cremation documents, that Mr Jones' death was moderately suspicious. The police took a statement from Mr Jones' daughter, Mrs Valerie Bancroft.
An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1987 and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book. Mr Jones' medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Jones worked as a gas fitter for many years until his retirement in 1970. Mrs Bancroft recalls that, from about this time, he suffered from chronic indigestion, for which he took Gaviscon. Soon afterwards, he also developed angina. Despite these conditions, Mr Jones remained active and was able to tend his garden. From the early 1980s, Mr Jones' family noticed that he had begun to lose his memory. The family thought he might have Alzheimer's disease.
In the autumn of either 1985 or 1986, Mr Jones had a stroke. Shipman attended and advised that he did not require any treatment. He made a full recovery, although he appeared older and more frail than before. He went out less, although he was still able to walk unaided.
Mrs Bancroft saw her father regularly and last saw him a day or two before his death. She remembers that he was in his normal state of health.
The Day of the Death
At midday on Monday, 6th
April, Mrs Jones telephoned her daughter at work and told her that Mr Jones had suffered a heart attack. Mrs Bancroft went to the house where she found her father collapsed and unconscious on the kitchen floor. Mrs Jones told her that her father had been sitting in a dining chair eating his lunch, when he suddenly fell to his side, striking his head on the cooker. He had a small cut on the side of his head. Also present at the house was a neighbour, Mr Derek Robinson, who has since died. An ambulance was called. While waiting for it to arrive, Mrs Bancroft tried to revive her father. On their arrival, the ambulance crew gave oxygen and cardiac massage but they, too, failed to resuscitate Mr Jones and he was declared dead.
It appears that a member of the ambulance crew summoned Shipman, who arrived at about 3pm. He showed a caring attitude towards the family and agreed to certify the cause of death.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not been recovered, although the MCCD counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. It is recorded that Shipman last saw Mr Jones alive on 30th
March 1987. He certified that the cause of Mr Jones' death was cerebrovascular accident due to cerebral arteriosclerosis. Ischaemic heart disease was recorded to be a condition contributing to death but not related to the cerebrovascular accident. It is recorded that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that Shipman had seen the body after death. Although Shipman certified the cause of death to be cerebrovascular accident, Mrs Bancroft believed that her father had died as a result of a heart attack. Mr Jones' name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for 30th
March 1987. It is possible, although unlikely, given his generally frail condition, that Mr Jones saw Shipman at the surgery on that day.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mr Jones had died at
'Approximately 13:30'
. He said that he had attended Mr Jones during his last illness for about one year. He said that he had last seen Mr Jones alive seven days before death and about 20 minutes after death, at which time he had performed a complete external examination. The cause of death was stated as on the MCCD counterfoil (save that the secondary cause was said to be
'cerebal'
(
sic
)
arteriosclerosis and the mode of death was said to be syncope lasting only seconds. Shipman said that his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on statements made by Mrs Jones and a neighbour. Shipman said that Mrs Jones had nursed her husband during his last illness and had been present at the death. There are no suspicious features on this document save that Shipman claimed to have seen Mr Jones on 30th
March 1987 and this seems unlikely.
Conclusion
It appears to me that Mr Jones must have died a natural death.
Mr Jones had suffered a stroke some time before his death. It is also possible that Mr Jones' loss of memory might have been the result of a number of small strokes, sometimes called transient ischaemic attacks. He must have been at risk of suffering another stroke. His death cannot be regarded as wholly unexpected.
There is no evidence that Shipman saw Mr Jones alive on the day of his death. There is good evidence that Mr Jones suffered a collapse while having lunch, in the presence of his wife. I think it is likely that Mrs Jones thought her husband must have had a heart attack and this is why Mrs Bancroft has thought for many years that that was the cause of her father's death. In fact, the collapse as described might well have been due to a stroke and, bearing in mind the past history, it seems likely that that is what must have happened.
When Professor Baker said that he thought the circumstances of the death were moderately suspicious, he relied only on the cremation documents and did not have the statement of Mrs Bancroft, describing the circumstances of the death. The only possible cause for suspicion is that Shipman's claim that he had seen Mr Jones alive on 30th
March might have been false. However, even if it was, I do not entertain any real suspicion that he was involved in causing Mr Jones' death. Shipman seemed to be under the impression that the registrar would refuse to accept his certification of the cause of death unless he had seen the patient within 14 days before death. He quite often made a false claim of this kind in cases where he had certainly not caused the death. I think he wanted to avoid the risk of a coroner's referral and post-mortem examination, with its attendant delay and distress for the family. Standing alone, that probable falsehood does not give cause for concern.
I hope this decision will allay any anxiety Mrs Bancroft might have felt about her father's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001