The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
David Jones
Introduction
Mr David Jones was found dead at his home, 27 Rufford Avenue, Hyde on Wednesday, 22nd
December 1993 at the age of 73. Mr Jones' death was entered in the register of deaths as having occurred on 22nd
December 1993. However, I have concluded from the evidence available to this Inquiry that Mr Jones died on Tuesday, 21st
December 1993. Mr Jones lived in sheltered accommodation. He had been a patient of Shipman for many years and had followed him when Shipman moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker found the death to be moderately suspicious upon his consideration of Mr Jones' medical records. He observed that Mr Jones' sudden death was not unexpected. He did not consider the death to be suspicious on the basis of the information supplied in the cremation documentation. There was no police investigation and no inquest has been held.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Irene Britton (Mr Jones' stepdaughter) and from Mrs Glennis Aughton (the warden at Rufford Avenue). The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Jones' general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Britton recalls that Mr Jones suffered from heart trouble, although she never thought that his condition was serious. Mrs Aughton was aware that Mr Jones had problems with his blood pressure. Cigarette smoking and the consumption of alcohol aggravated his condition. Mrs Aughton recalls that she would often arrange for Shipman to visit Mr Jones and she had the impression that Shipman considered Mr Jones to be a 'difficult patient' because of the number of visits requested.
Mr Jones' medical records confirm that he had a history of heart trouble. In August 1993, he was admitted to Tameside General Hospital with a history of pleuritic chest pain and increasing shortness of breath associated with a productive cough. Cardiac enzyme and serial electrocardiogram (ECG) tests revealed no evidence of a myocardial infarction. A diagnosis of infective exacerbation of chronic obstructive airways disease (COAD) was made and Mr Jones made a rapid recovery on oral antibiotics and nebulisers. He was, however, readmitted to hospital in September 1993 with a history of central chest pain. An ECG carried out on admission revealed signs suggestive of ischaemia due to unstable angina. A myocardial infarction screen and subsequent ECG revealed signs suggestive of a sub-endocardial myocardial infarction. It appears that before Mr Jones could be properly assessed for this condition he discharged himself.
On 12th
October 1993, Dr M A Matin, consultant physician, wrote to Shipman that he had visited Mr Jones on 7th
October. Mr Jones complained of a tight pain across his chest, mainly on exertion. At times the pain would radiate to his throat and down both arms. Dr Matin thought that the pain resembled angina pectoris. On 27th
October 1993, Dr Matin reviewed Mr Jones and diagnosed ischaemic heart disease with a recent sub-endocardial infarction and a hiatus hernia with oesophagitis. Mr Jones was readmitted to hospital between 1st
and 5th
November 1993 and 8th
and 12th
November 1993 with recurring chest pain. A diagnosis of recurrent unstable angina was made.
A recurring theme throughout the hospital records and correspondence, is that Mr Jones had been advised to give up smoking but would not act upon that advice.
On 22nd
November 1993, there is an entry in the computerised medical records which suggests that Mr Jones had been referred to Miss Morrell, a consultant surgeon at Tameside General Hospital, with a view to surgery for prostate problems. Confirmation that he was awaiting prostate surgery can be seen in the Accident and Emergency Triage Nurse Report for 27th
September.
On 1st
December 1993, there is a computerised entry which notes that Mr Jones had been discharged from Tameside General Hospital. The letter on which this entry seems to be based, dated 29th
November, does not discharge Mr Jones from further attendance but summarises his current condition and medication and advises that he would be reviewed on 21st
December.
The penultimate entry in Mr Jones' handwritten general practitioner records is dated 14th
December 1993, although this appears to have been changed from 12th
December 1993. This entry appears to read:
' has
(
illegible
)
/ borrowed off
Pulmicort / neighbour
rept inhalers today'
.
This suggests that Mr Jones was requesting a pulmicort inhaler and had had some sort of problem as a result of having borrowed something, possibly an inhaler, from a neighbour. There are no entries in any of the practice books to confirm this consultation and there is no record of a request for a repeat prescription in the acute prescriptions book.
Mrs Britton usually visited Mr Jones two or three times a week and would also meet him in Hyde occasionally. She says that he was very active and went out quite a lot. He would do his own shopping, meet friends and visit his brother in Ashton. However, he was always home in time for tea and rarely went out afterwards. Mrs Britton last saw Mr Jones on Sunday, 19th
December. She recalls that he was in good spirits and was not depressed or in any way worried about his health. He did not mention that he was expecting a visit from Shipman.
The computerised medical records show a visit to Mr Jones' home on 20th
December 1993. The note does not reveal either the purpose of the visit or any findings or treatment. Mr Jones' name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for that day. There is, however, a reference in the acute prescriptions book which reads:
'10702 (NU PHARM)
David Jones
(put on by hosp)
Suscard 5mg'
.
That entry suggests that Nupharm, a pharmacy in Hyde, had telephoned to relay a request for a prescription for Suscard for Mr Jones. Mr Jones had in fact been put on Suscard by the hospital in November, as appears in the discharge letter of 29th
November.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Aughton probably saw Mr Jones on the morning of Tuesday, 21st
December, although she cannot now remember that she did so. She visited each resident every morning and if there had been any problem connected with Mr Jones, I think she would probably have remembered it.
Correspondence from Tameside General Hospital, which must have arrived at Shipman's surgery after Mr Jones' death, shows that Mr Jones was seen in the outpatient clinic on 21st
December 1993. He said he felt better after using a glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) spray twice daily, although he reported that he still awoke every night with retrosternal chest pain. It is not known at what time he was seen.
It appears that Mrs Hilda Knipe, Mr Jones' neighbour, saw him going out with a friend at some time during the day on 21st
December. There is no evidence as to what time this was.
There is no evidence that Shipman called at Mr Jones' flat on 21st
December. Mrs Aughton believes that she always knew when Shipman visited Mr Jones because she had a very clear view of his house, which was directly opposite her office. Moreover, she thinks that Mrs Knipe would have told her whenever Shipman visited. Shipman's appointments sheet for 21st
December shows that he had a very busy morning in the surgery and would probably not have finished seeing patients until about 11.30am or even later. He had an antenatal clinic at noon, which would have lasted until about 12.30pm. He would then have been free to go out on his rounds. His visits book shows that he had only three visits scheduled for that day. All were close together in the Dowson Road area. Shipman would have had plenty of time to visit Mr Jones as well. However, it is not clear whether Mr Jones was at home in the afternoon. Shipman's afternoon surgery started at 4pm and was also busy. He would not have been free until about 6pm. It is possible that he visited Mr Jones on his way home. Shipman sometimes visited patients on his way home. Rufford Avenue is not far from Mottram Road, which Shipman might well have used as his usual route home. By the time Shipman went home it would have been dark and it is less likely that his presence would have been noticed by Mrs Aughton or Mrs Knipe.
At about 9am on 22nd
December 1993, Mrs Aughton made her routine morning call on Mr Jones. There was no reply at the door. She spoke to Mrs Knipe, who told her that she had not seen Mr Jones that morning but had seen him go out with a friend the previous day. Mrs Aughton finished her rounds and returned to Mr Jones' flat at about 10am, but again there was no answer. Mrs Aughton then fetched a key to Mr Jones' flat and went inside accompanied by a home help.
They found Mr Jones sitting in a chair close to the emergency cord with his head slightly bowed. He was fully dressed. His face was ashen. Mrs Aughton thought that Mr Jones had died. She returned to her office and telephoned the Market Street Surgery. Shipman arrived about 30 minutes later.
Shipman made the following note in the handwritten general practitioner records, dated 22nd
December 1993:
'V
(
visit
)
12 midday
found by warden cold
approximate time death 12 midnight
1a C.T.
1b IHD
2 DU'
.
This suggests that when Shipman attended at about midday. He estimated that Mr Jones had died at about midnight and diagnosed the cause of death as a coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. A duodenal ulcer was a contributory cause. There is no corresponding entry in the computerised records, although the visits book for 22nd
December contains a reference to Mr Jones' name and address.
When Mrs Britton arrived later, she saw that her stepfather's body was in a chair in which he did not usually sit.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. Shipman recorded that Mr Jones had died at his home on 22nd
December 1993. He said that he had last seen Mr Jones alive on
'14'
, which is probably intended to mean that he had seen him on 14th
December. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. Duodenal ulcer was said to be a contributory cause.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. The time of death was recorded as
'12 midnight on 21-22 December'
. He stated that he had last seen Mr Jones alive nine days before death, which broadly correlates with the entry in the medical records relating to 12th
or 14th
December. He said that he had seen the body 12 hours after death. The mode of death was said to be collapse lasting only seconds. No one had been present at the moment of death.
Conclusion
Mr Jones had a history of ischaemic heart disease, unstable angina, sub-endocardial myocardial infarction, chronic obstructive airways disease and hiatus hernia. He had been a frequent patient at hospital on account of his chest pain. This history suggests that Mr Jones was at high risk of suffering a death from cardiac causes, although correspondence from the hospital suggests that he was well on 21st
December. His death was sudden but by no means inexplicable.
However, there are some circumstances surrounding this death which raise a suspicion that Shipman might have been involved. The first is the suddenness of the death. Mr Jones was out and about on 21st
December and was found dead the next morning, wearing his day clothes. It seems at least possible, even likely, that he died on 21st
December. In such circumstances, most doctors would refer the death to the coroner with a view to post-mortem examination. Shipman did not.
Another factor which arouses some suspicion is that Shipman claimed on Form B that he was able to tell at what time the death had occurred. In his generic evidence, Dr John Grenville has explained that it is not possible to estimate the time of a death without taking an internal body temperature, usually in the rectum. Even then, the task of estimation is a difficult operation and is usually only attempted by a pathologist. Pathologists do not usually claim to be able to make an exact estimate, as Shipman often did and appears to have done in this case. Whenever I see that Shipman made a precise estimate of the time of death, I suspect that he might have an ulterior motive. I have come across many cases in which he has killed a patient and has claimed to be able to estimate the time of death precisely. He had always estimated it some hours after his last visit. In other words, he has distanced himself from the death. In the present case, he had estimated the time of death at midnight and the death has been registered as having occurred on 22nd
December. Shipman could not possibly have known when the death occurred. All he could honestly have said was that it had occurred at some time between whenever Mr Jones had last been seen, which was probably when Mrs Knipe saw him going out, and the time when his body had been found. I suspect that Shipman wanted to create the impression that the death occurred at midnight because he could not have visited at that time. If he had visited, the latest time would probably have been about 6.30pm and he would not know whether or not he had been seen.
As I have said, there is no eyewitness evidence to show that Shipman visited Mr Jones on 21st
December. Moreover, the layout of Rufford Avenue, which I have seen for myself, is such that a visitor who came by car in the hours of daylight would probably be noticed. The houses are set round an oval grassy area and there are usually very few cars parked on the road. I can well understand why Mrs Aughton thinks she would have noticed if Shipman had visited. Having said that, it would not be at all surprising if Shipman were able to visit in the hours of darkness without being noticed. On 21st
December it would have been dark by 4pm.
In Form B of the cremation certificate and on the MCCD counterfoil, Shipman claimed that he had last seen Mr Jones alive on 12th
or 14th
December. As 12th
December was a Sunday, that seems unlikely unless Mr Jones called Shipman out in an emergency. There is no evidence that he did. For Tuesday, 14th
December, there is an entry in the medical records but it does not appear to suggest a personal consultation. The appointments sheets and visits books do not suggest that Shipman actually saw Mr Jones. I recognise that Shipman was often cavalier in respect of his duties of certification and frequently claimed to have seen a patient when he had not, even when there is no suspicion that he might have killed the patient. This kind of white lie does not raise a high degree of suspicion. However, it is possible that Shipman wished to create the impression that he had seen Mr Jones within 14 days so as to avoid the possibility that the registrar might refer the death to the coroner. It is possible that he fabricated an entry in the medical records and initially created one for 12th
December. When he realised that this was a Sunday, he might have changed it to 14th
December.
There is an entry in the computerised records which suggests a visit on 20th
December, but it gives no detail at all. This is puzzling, because if Shipman had seen Mr Jones on 20th
December, one would have expected him to enter that date on the MCCD counterfoil and Form B rather than 14th
December. Mr Jones' name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for 20th
December and I suspect that there was no such visit. Unfortunately, it is not possible to check when that entry was made, as there was no audit trail facility on the computer in 1993. I suspect that this entry might have been made after Mr Jones' death as part of a cover-up. If someone had seen Shipman at the house on 21st
December, he might have been able to show that that person was wrong and had really seen him on 20th
December.
These suspicions do not in themselves amount to very much. However, it appears to me that Mr Jones would have been a suitable and likely victim for Shipman. Shipman disapproved of patients who would not accept advice. He sometimes killed patients who he thought were a nuisance and required a great deal of his attention. In my view, he also disapproved of the use of public resources on patients who would not take care of themselves. I think Mr Jones would have excited Shipman's disapproval on all three grounds.
These suspicions do not amount to enough for me to say that I think Shipman probably killed Mr Jones. Mr Jones might well have died a natural death. However, there are such grounds for suspicion that I am not prepared to say that he probably did. I feel unable to reach any positive conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001