The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ronald Jameson
Introduction
Mr Ronald Jameson died at his home, 57 Grosvenor Road, Hyde on Thursday, 21st
February 1991 at the age of 48. He lived with his wife and daughter. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Jameson's death was coronary thrombosis.
In January 2001, the police investigated Mr Jameson's death because Professor Richard Baker, who had examined the medical records and the cremation documents, considered it to be moderately suspicious on the basis of the medical records, although non-suspicious on the basis of the cremation forms. The police interviewed Mr Jameson's daughter, Mrs Gail Platt.
An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has had access to Mr Jameson's general practitioner records, Shipman's visits book for 1991 and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Platt told the police that, at the time of her father's death, he was off work suffering from a back complaint. In the days before his death, he complained of heartburn. On Monday, 18th
February, he apparently complained of pins and needles (although it is not stated in which part of the body) and also vomited. He looked generally unwell. He made an appointment to see Shipman on the following day. Shipman prescribed tablets for heartburn. Mr Jameson later told his wife that he had not mentioned the pins and needles to Shipman. The computerised medical records include entries dated 19th
February 1991, recording prescriptions for Gastrocote and Tagamet, both commonly prescribed for the treatment of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease or heartburn. An entry of the same date also records that Mr Jameson had stopped smoking.
Mr Jameson's Lloyd George notes were found at Shipman's home. They do not assist in a determination of his medical condition in 1991 as the last entry pre-dates his death by almost two years.
The Day of the Death
On Thursday, 21st
February, Mr Jameson apparently managed to eat the whole of his evening meal, something he had not done for some time. When Mrs Platt returned home from an evening out, her mother told her that her father was unwell and that she had called the doctor out. At about 11pm, Mrs Platt went upstairs to bed. About ten minutes later, she heard a 'loud thud'. She went downstairs and, at that moment, the emergency doctor, Dr Rogers, knocked on the door. She let him in. Mr Jameson was lying on the floor in the kitchen and Mrs Platt and the doctor gave mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and cardiac massage. Mrs Jameson was also present and an ambulance was called. The first ambulance to arrive did not have resuscitation equipment. When a second ambulance arrived, further unsuccessful attempts were made to revive Mr Jameson.
The duty doctor transfer book retrieved from the Donneybrook Surgery shows that Dr Rogers was on duty until 11.15pm on the evening of 21st
February.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) completed by Shipman has not survived, but the counterfoil is available and records that Shipman had last seen Mr Jameson alive on 21st
February, the day of the death. That does not appear accurate, as both the family and medical records indicate that the last time Shipman saw Mr Jameson was on 19th
February. The counterfoil indicates that a post-mortem examination was not to be held and that Shipman had not seen the body after death but another doctor had. The cause of death is recorded to be
'CT'
(coronary thrombosis) and Shipman has written underneath:
'Seen by Rogers attempted resuscitation - seen before death'
.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. It is recorded that Mr Jameson died at 11.25pm on 21st
February, and that Shipman had not attended Mr Jameson during his last illness but that his partner had. It is recorded that the partner was present before and at the death. Shipman said that he had seen the body
'24 hours or so'
after death and had made a complete external examination. The answer to the question as to when Shipman last saw Mr Jameson alive is left blank. The mode of death is said to have been collapse of minutes' duration. The answers to the questions relating to the cause and mode of death were said to be based on the observations of Dr Rogers, the ambulance men and Mr Jameson's wife. Dr Rogers and Mrs Jameson were said to have been present at the moment of death.
There are a number of minor discrepancies in the death certification. Shipman recorded on the MCCD counterfoil that he had seen Mr Jameson alive on 21st
February. Shipman has not answered the question on Form B, asking when he last saw Mr Jameson alive. On Form B, Shipman states that he saw the body 24 hours after death. On the MCCD counterfoil, completed on the same day, he stated that the body was seen by Dr Rogers but not by him. I think it likely that Shipman's claim on the counterfoil that he had seen Mr Jameson alive on the day of the death was a quick, but inaccurate, way of saying that Dr Rogers had seen Mr Jameson alive on that day.
Conclusion
I am quite sure that this was a natural death. All the evidence suggests that Mr Jameson died of a heart attack at which Shipman was not present.
I can well understand why Professor Baker felt moderately suspicious about this death. The medical records are extremely scanty. However, Professor Baker did not have available to him the witness evidence describing the circumstances of Mr Jameson's death. He would not have known that Mr Jameson had a history of chest discomfort and pins and needles. He was unaware that the emergency doctor was called out in the late evening of 21st
February because Mr Jameson felt unwell. It was Dr Rogers who attended, not Shipman. Nor did Professor Baker know that Mrs Jameson and Mrs Platt were in the house with Mr Jameson when he collapsed, and remained throughout the efforts to save him. Now that Mrs Platt's account is available, all suspicions are laid to rest.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001