The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The First Report
>
Alphabetical List of Cases
>
Harold Edward Jackman
Introduction
Mr Harold Edward Jackman died at Halifax General Hospital on Sunday, 10th
November 1974 at the age of 78. He lived with his wife, Mrs Elsie Grace Jackman, at 56 Ferney Lee Road, Todmorden. Mr Jackman was registered as a patient with Shipman. At the time of Mr Jackman's death, Shipman had been practising from the Abraham Ormerod Surgery in Todmorden for about eight months. Following a post-mortem examination without inquest, the Coroner for the Metropolitan District of Calderdale certified that the cause of Mr Jackman's death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the prostate.
Following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's report in January 2001, the police investigated the death. Mr Jackman's death was one of a number that the police included in their investigation into Shipman's activities during his time in Todmorden. In most of the deaths investigated, the cause had been certified by Shipman. In this case, the cause was certified by the coroner. The police established that Mrs Elsie Jackman had died and no other relatives or witnesses were traced.
Mr Jackman's general practitioner and hospital records have not survived. The Inquiry has had access to a copy of the Report of Death prepared by the West Yorkshire Constabulary for the benefit of the coroner. The report is dated 11th
October 1974, although this must be an error as it must have been prepared on 10th
or 11th
November of that year. In addition to that report, the Inquiry has a copy of the post-mortem examination report prepared by Dr A T Edwards, consultant pathologist, following examination of the body on 11th
November 1974. The Inquiry has also obtained reports from Dr John Grenville and Professor Helen Whitwell.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
The only information available about Mr Jackman's background comes from the Report of Death, which was prepared following consultation with Mrs Jackman. Mr Jackman was a retired civil servant. For some time before his death he had been suffering from an enlarged prostate gland. Shortly before he died, he had refused operative treatment for the condition due to the poor prospects of success. He was seen regularly by Shipman for his condition, but there is no evidence as to when Shipman last saw Mr Jackman or what treatment he provided. In particular, it is not known whether he was providing pain-relieving drugs, although this would seem likely.
The Day of the Death
The only detail contained within the Report of Death as to the circumstances of the day of death is that Mr Jackman was admitted to Halifax General Hospital and died within one hour of admission. Mr Jackman must have travelled a distance of some 13 miles from home to the hospital. It would appear that Mr Jackman must have survived for at least an hour and a half after leaving home. I infer from that that he must have survived for at least that time after Shipman could possibly have given him a pain-relieving injection. However, there is no evidence that such an injection was given.
Post-Mortem Report
Dr Edwards carried out a post-mortem examination at 2.30pm on 11th
November 1974. There were no marks of external bruising or other signs of violence. On internal examination, Dr Edwards found bilateral pulmonary congestion due, in his view, to heart failure. The heart was enlarged due to hypertrophy of the left ventricle, which Dr Edwards attributed to hypertension. Within the abdominal cavity, Dr Edwards noted a primary carcinoma of the prostate gland with infiltration involving the bladder, rectum, abdominal lymph nodes and chest lymph nodes. The ureters had been occluded by the carcinoma, resulting in bilateral hydronephrosis and hydroureter. On the basis of these findings, Dr Edwards concluded that the cause of death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the prostate.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Whitwell has considered Dr Edwards' findings and conclusions. She observed that Mr Jackman had a number of chronic conditions. The chronic heart disease was such that it alone could have accounted for the death. On the basis of the description of the widespread tumour, in Professor Whitwell's opinion, it was almost certain that Mr Jackman was developing, or had developed, a degree of renal failure resulting from the tumour obstructing the outflow of urine from the kidneys. He could only have survived for days or weeks. She agreed that death would have inevitably occurred at some point in time from the stated cause. Even had opiate drugs been given to Mr Jackman (and there is no evidence that they were), she said that such drugs 'may not necessarily have altered the outcome'.
Dr Grenville noted from the post-mortem report that Mr Jackman suffered from extensively metastasising cancer of the prostate. He concluded that the cancer was sufficient to cause his death. Dr Grenville noted that there was no evidence to suggest that Shipman had caused Mr Jackman's death and, in his opinion, the most likely explanation for his death was renal failure due to the effect of the cancer upon his ureters and kidneys.
Conclusion
The post-mortem examination revealed physical findings sufficient to account for death. In the opinions of both Professor Whitwell and Dr Grenville, Mr Jackman would have suffered a degree of renal failure and this was the most likely explanation for his death.
There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman saw Mr Jackman on the day of his death. It is quite possible that he did and that it was he who arranged the admission to hospital. We do not know. If he did, it is quite possible that he gave Mr Jackman an injection of some kind of opiate. If he was in pain, as seems very likely, some pain relief would seem appropriate for the journey. It is not always easy to assess what dose is appropriate for a patient who is suffering severe pain, especially if the patient has been receiving opiates over a period of time. It will usually be necessary to increase the dosage as the pain worsens and the patient becomes accustomed to the effect of the drug. If Shipman gave an injection, we do not know how much he gave.
It seems unlikely (although not impossible) that any dose given to Mr Jackman could have been the principal cause of his death. Professor Henry McQuay and Dr Grenville say that an intramuscular injection of an opiate reaches its maximal effect within between 30 and 60 minutes from the time of the injection. Therefore, if Shipman had administered a lethal injection before Mr Jackman left home, one might have expected him to die either during the journey or very soon after arrival at hospital. Although there are elements of speculation in this calculation (as the times given by the experts are subject to some variability, the journey time is not known and it is not clear how long after arrival Mr Jackman died), it rather looks as though Mr Jackman could not have died as the direct result of a lethal injection of opiate.
Bearing in mind the findings at post-mortem examination and the opinions of the experts, it seems to me highly likely that Mr Jackman died a natural death. There is no positive evidence that Shipman played any part in events. It is possible that Shipman was present shortly before Mr Jackman was put into the ambulance and that he gave a pain-relieving injection before the journey. If he did, it is likely that the injection was intended only to relieve pain, although it might have had the unintended effect of hastening the death. I cannot absolutely rule out the possibility that he gave an injection of opiate before Mr Jackman left home and that the dose was excessive and intended to hasten Mr Jackman's end. However, I stress that there is no evidence that this occurred.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001