The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Norah Johnson
Introduction
Mrs Norah Johnson died at her home, 27 Rydal Avenue, Hyde on Thursday, 8th
July 1982 at the age of 76. She had been a patient of Dr William Bennett at the Donneybrook Surgery. He certified that the cause of her death was congestive cardiac failure.
On 15th
February 2000, Mrs Johnson's daughter, Mrs June Adshead, contacted the police to express her concern about the circumstances of her mother's death. The police investigated the death and following interviews with Mrs Adshead and Ms Annie Wood (a neighbour of Mrs Johnson), they prepared a report.
Mrs Johnson's general practitioner records have not survived. The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1985 and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer diary.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Johnson was a widow and lived alone. Mrs Adshead says that her mother enjoyed good health, although she suffered from bronchitis, especially in the summer months.
About two weeks before her death, Mrs Johnson began to suffer from bronchitis and about a week before her death, Dr Bennett visited her at home and prescribed oral medication. Despite this, she did not improve.
On Wednesday, 7th
July 1982, Mrs Adshead says that she requested a further visit for her mother. At about 12.30pm, Shipman, who was then practising from the Donneybrook Surgery, arrived at Mrs Johnson's home carrying a bag or case. Mrs Adshead recalls that Dr Bennett was on holiday. Mrs Adshead remained with Shipman throughout his visit, during which he examined Mrs Johnson by placing a stethoscope on her chest and back. Mrs Adshead specifically recalls that no injection was administered. Shipman issued a prescription and left. The visit had lasted about ten minutes. Mrs Adshead collected her mother's new medication from the pharmacy. She cannot remember the name of the drug but the medication was in tablet form and was something her mother had not taken before. Mrs Adshead returned to the house with the tablets and stayed with her mother until about 3pm. Her mother seemed 'as well as could be expected' at that time.
Shipman's visits book contains no entry relating to a visit to Mrs Johnson on 7th
July. There is a note of a visit on 5th
July; this indicates that Mrs Johnson was Dr Bennett's patient and Shipman proposed a review in seven days' time. There is an illegible word, probably the name of a drug.
The Donneybrook Surgery records indicate that Shipman was not the doctor on duty on the evening of 7th
July.
Ms Wood had been a good friend of Mrs Johnson for many years and had a key to her house. She visited Mrs Johnson every evening. On 7th
July, she found Mrs Johnson was 'not herself and very quiet'. When Ms Wood left at 10pm, Mrs Johnson saw her to the door and Ms Wood specifically recalls that the security chain was applied. Ms Wood arranged to call on Mrs Johnson the next morning, so as to be there when a telephone was installed at the flat.
The Day of the Death
At about 8.30am the following morning, Ms Wood went over to Mrs Johnson's flat and opened the lock with her key, but she could not open the door because the security chain was still in place. The newspaper was still in the letterbox and the curtains were closed. Ms Wood sought the assistance of a council employee to force the front door open. Mrs Hannible, another neighbour, who is no longer alive, went into the flat where she found Mrs Johnson lying in bed, dressed in her nightclothes. She had died. Ms Wood telephoned Mrs Adshead to tell her what had happened. The police also attended.
Dr Bennett certified the causes of death to be congestive cardiac failure and chronic bronchitis.
Conclusion
I am quite sure that Mrs Johnson died a natural death.
It seems highly likely that Shipman visited Mrs Johnson on 5th
July, rather than 7th
July. Even if he did visit on 7th
July, two people saw Mrs Johnson alive afterwards. During the afternoon, her daughter stayed with her until about 3pm. During the evening, Ms Wood stayed until about 10pm. When Ms Wood left, Mrs Johnson applied her security chain, which was still in place the next morning. It is hard to see how anyone could have been into Mrs Johnson's flat during the night.
Although the death was unexpected and a shock to Mrs Adshead, Mrs Johnson had been suffering from a persistent episode of bronchitis. It is not possible to discover, so many years later, whether Mrs Johnson had also been suffering from congestive heart disease. Whatever the precise cause of the death, there is no reason whatever to think that Shipman, or any other person, had any hand in it.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001