The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Richard Johnson
Introduction
Mr Richard Johnson died at his home, 28 Woodbrooke Avenue, Hyde on Thursday, 3rd
May 1979 at the age of 89. It is unclear whether Mr Johnson was registered as a patient of Shipman but it is likely, as he was formerly a patient of Dr Bennett and Shipman took over Dr Bennett's list of patients when he arrived in Hyde in October 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Johnson's death was senility. There has been no inquest into the death.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Margaret Mackenzie, Mr Johnson's daughter and the informant in relation to his death. The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1979. Mr Johnson's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Johnson served in the police force until 1935, after which time he worked as a security officer until the age of 65. At the time of his death, he was a widower and lived with his housekeeper and niece, Mrs Betty Golds. Mrs Mackenzie and her husband used to visit Mr Johnson fortnightly.
Mr Johnson suffered from anxiety for many years before he died and took medication for this. Mrs Mackenzie recalls that, during the last five years of his life, her father's short-term memory gradually deteriorated.
Over the weekend of 28th
/29th
April 1979, Mrs Mackenzie and her husband visited Mr Johnson. They found him in bed, obviously unwell. This was most unusual. Mrs Mackenzie cannot recall that she had ever before seen her father ill in bed.
Mrs Mackenzie and her husband returned to Hyde in the days immediately before Mr Johnson's death, probably on Wednesday, 2nd
May 1979. His condition had deteriorated; he had become incoherent and was mumbling continuously. That night, Mrs Mackenzie's husband stayed up with Mr Johnson whilst Mrs Mackenzie slept.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of Thursday, 3rd
May, a doctor arrived at the house. Mrs Mackenzie had never seen him before and has described him as dark-haired and in his forties. Shipman was 33 at the time. She cannot remember whether or not he had a beard but thinks that she would remember if he had a full beard. She cannot remember whether he was wearing glasses. It is unclear from her description whether this doctor was Shipman but Mr Johnson's name does appear in Shipman's visits book on Thursday, 3rd
May.
The doctor issued a prescription and said to Mrs Mackenzie: 'He'll probably last a week, but he'll be more rested'. She understood this to mean that her father would feel better having taken the medication. Mrs Mackenzie collected the prescription from a local chemist. When she arrived back at the house there was a nurse present. Her recollection is confirmed by a note in Shipman's visits book against Mr Johnson's name:
'D/N Bank nurse'
, followed by something illegible. Mrs Mackenzie remembers passing the medication she had collected to the nurse and telling her that the doctor had said that Mr Johnson would 'last a week'. The nurse said that she did not think he would last a week and Mrs Mackenzie understood the nurse to be saying that the tablets would 'help Mr Johnson on his way'.
At about 2.30pm, Mr Johnson became quiet and Mrs Mackenzie's husband said that he thought that he had died. Mrs Golds was out but she had left a note with the doctor's number on it, which Mrs Mackenzie called. A doctor arrived shortly afterwards, although it was not the same doctor who had attended earlier that day. Beyond the fact that he was male, Mrs Mackenzie is unable to describe him. He said to Mrs Mackenzie that Mr Johnson had died of old age but that he could not put that on the 'death certificate'. She recalls that a different cause of death was certified.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not been recovered but its counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman recorded that he had last seen Mr Johnson alive on the day of his death. He stated that there would not be a post-mortem examination and that he had seen the body after death. The cause of death was said to be senility. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 4th
May 1979.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mr Johnson died a natural death.
His physical and mental decline is well described by Mrs Mackenzie. His death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
It appears that Shipman probably attended in the morning of 3rd
May. He claimed to have seen Mr Johnson alive on that day and the entry in his visits book supports this. According to the statements of Dr Roberts and Dr Napier, Shipman was usually off duty on Thursday afternoons. That is probably why another doctor attended after the death.
There is no evidence that Shipman gave Mr Johnson an injection that morning. The evidence suggests that he prescribed some form of medication, which I infer was to be taken orally. The medication was supplied by a pharmacist who would have written the dosage on the container and would have raised a query if it had seemed inappropriate. Moreover, it was put into the hands of the district nurse who would surely not have given it without speaking to the doctor if she had thought that the dose was dangerously large. Assuming that Mr Johnson was given some of the medication, there is no evidence that it had any noticeable effect on him. Some time elapsed before his breathing went quiet.
Mrs Mackenzie's concern arises from the remarks made by the district nurse on seeing the medication which Shipman had prescribed for her father. Her impression was that the nurse thought that the medication might be expected to hasten his death. However, it is quite possible that the nurse was only expressing her opinion as to Mr Johnson's life expectancy, which differed from the doctor's opinion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001