The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Ellen Jordan
Introduction
Mrs Mary Ellen Jordan died at her home, 11 Godley Hill Road, Hyde on Wednesday, 30th
August 1978 at the age of 73. She was a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to aortic stenosis with ischaemic heart disease.
In August 2001, the Inquiry wrote to Mrs Jessie Nadin, Mrs Jordan's sister-in-law, who was the informant named in the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'). She contacted the Inquiry and expressed concern as to the circumstances of her sister-in-law's death. The Inquiry has investigated the death and has taken a statement from Mrs Nadin.
The Inquiry has tried to locate Mrs Jordan's home help. A number of home helps have been contacted but none remembers Mrs Jordan. It has, however, been established that Mr Jim Marsland, Mrs Jordan's neighbour, is now dead. Another neighbour, Mrs Jennifer Gibson, has been unable to assist the Inquiry with any detail as to the circumstances of Mrs Jordan's death. Attempts have been made to contact a hairdresser referred to by Mrs Nadin, but these have proved unsuccessful.
No documentary evidence relating to Shipman's practice is available from 1978. Mrs Jordan's general practitioner records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Jordan was a widow and lived alone. About a year before her death, she had had some heart trouble, probably angina, for which she was treated at Manchester Royal Infirmary. After this, she could not undertake much physical activity. She was also quite plump. She remained independent and looked after her house with the aid of a home help, who also did her shopping. She was able to do light household chores and cook for herself. She was a very sociable woman who enjoyed the company of her neighbours and Mrs Nadin, who visited about three times each week to spend the afternoon with her. Mrs Nadin was under the impression that Mrs Jordan used to see her doctor at his surgery and does not recall that Mrs Jordan ever mentioned that he had visited her at home.
Mrs Nadin noticed that, from about July 1978, Mrs Jordan's health began to deteriorate and her breathing worsened. She had real difficulty in climbing the stairs at home.
On Tuesday, 29th
August 1978, the day before the death, Mrs Nadin arrived at Mrs Jordan's house, as usual, at about noon. Mrs Jordan had very little appetite for lunch and seemed generally lethargic. However, she ate a cream cake, which was a special favourite of hers. During the afternoon, a neighbour called in to see Mrs Jordan and suggested that her bed should be brought downstairs. Mrs Nadin and the neighbour brought the bed downstairs to the lounge. Mrs Jordan seemed pleased. Later, Mrs Nadin and Mrs Jordan had tea together and Mrs Jordan was able to eat a little. She did not say that she felt so unwell that she wanted the doctor to call. When Mrs Nadin left, at about 5.30pm, Mrs Jordan was sitting in her armchair watching television.
The Day of the Death
During the evening of 30th
August 1978, Mrs Nadin received a telephone call at home from a hairdresser who was speaking from Mrs Jordan's house. She said that she had called at the house to do Mrs Jordan's hair but had found her unwell and had called the doctor. She asked Mrs Nadin if she could come to the house to look after Mrs Jordan. Mrs Jordan's car was being repaired so the hairdresser came to fetch her. On the way to Mrs Jordan's house, a journey of about 15 minutes, the hairdresser said that the doctor had arrived and had given Mrs Jordan an injection. Mrs Nadin thinks, but is not sure, that the hairdresser said that the doctor had departed before she, the hairdresser, had left to collect Mrs Nadin.
Mrs Nadin and the hairdresser arrived at the house at about 8.45pm and found Mrs Jordan lying on her back in her bed, in the lounge. She was dead. Mrs Nadin was very shocked. Her recollection is that she telephoned an undertaker and waited for him to arrive. She thinks that she was too shocked to telephone the doctor. She does not recall having any contact with Shipman. Later on in the evening, the undertaker arrived and took the body to the chapel of rest. Mrs Nadin does not think that she collected the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and thinks that the funeral director must have collected it for her.
Certification
The MCCD has not survived but its counterfoil has been found. Shipman completed that on 31st
August. He stated that the death had occurred on 30th
August and that he had last seen Mrs Jordan alive on the day of her death. He said that he had seen the body after death and that there would be no post-mortem examination. The cause of death was said to be coronary thrombosis due to aortic stenosis with ischaemic heart disease. Undifferentiated carcinoma of the breast with multiple secondaries was said to have contributed to the death.
Mrs Jordan was cremated but the cremation documents do not appear to have survived.
Conclusion
Mrs Jordan had some history of heart trouble. Mrs Nadin has not mentioned that Mrs Jordan had ever suffered from cancer. However, she had noticed that Mrs Jordan's condition had deteriorated during the last month or two of her life. Her appetite was poor and she could not climb the stairs. The fact that the bed was moved downstairs the day before she died, suggests that there had been a further deterioration in Mrs Jordan's condition in the days leading up to her death. Given her history, Mrs Jordan was certainly at an increased risk of having a heart attack.
According to what Mrs Nadin was told by the hairdresser, a doctor was called to the house during the evening of 30th
August. Mrs Jordan must have been quite poorly for the hairdresser to call the doctor out as an emergency. Since it was Shipman who certified the cause of death, saying that he had seen Mrs Jordan alive that day, that doctor must have been Shipman. The hairdresser said that the doctor gave Mrs Jordan an injection. Mrs Jordan died shortly afterwards.
The circumstances as described by Mrs Nadin give rise to real suspicion that Shipman might have killed Mrs Jordan. However, there is a possibility that Mrs Jordan was having a heart attack when Shipman arrived and that she died a natural death. There is also a possibility that Mrs Jordan was having a heart attack and that Shipman gave her an injection which ensured that she died, thereby depriving her of the chance of recovery. Which is the more likely?
If Mrs Jordan was having a heart attack, one could understand why Shipman might have given her an injection, possibly of a small amount of opiate to relieve her pain and distress. One might expect that he would call an ambulance and have her admitted to hospital, but that does not seem to have been suggested. If she were having a heart attack, it would be very strange and quite unacceptable if he left her in the care of a hairdresser, who would be unable to stay with her. Mrs Nadin has the impression that the doctor had already left the house before the hairdresser set off to fetch Mrs Nadin. It is possible that she is mistaken about that and that he sent the hairdresser off to find Mrs Nadin, giving the impression that he would stay until her return. I think this is unlikely, as the hairdresser would have been very surprised to find that Shipman was not at the house when she returned and Mrs Nadin might have remembered that. In short, I do not think that Shipman behaved as any sensible competent doctor would have behaved when called to a patient suffering a heart attack. I infer that if Mrs Jordan was having a heart attack, Shipman did not take proper steps to treat her for it.
If on the other hand, Mrs Jordan was not having a heart attack and was not apparently very ill, it might have been perfectly acceptable for Shipman to leave, knowing that some arrangements were to be made for Mrs Jordan's supervision. But if she were not seriously ill, I feel bound to wonder what injection did Shipman give? It is possible but very unlikely that Mrs Jordan was in pain as the result of a cancer about which Mrs Nadin was unaware and which did not cause the death. If Mrs Jordan had not been having a heart attack, I ask myself, how could Shipman have certified the cause of her subsequent death? He would not have known the cause.
I find myself unable to decide whether or not Mrs Jordan was having a heart attack when Shipman arrived. However, I do feel able to conclude that if she was, then he did not treat her as he would have done if he had wanted her to survive. He would have called an ambulance; he would not have allowed her to be left alone. I think it likely that the injection was of an inappropriate dose of opiate and was designed to kill. If Shipman gave Mrs Jordan a lethal dose of opiate, he would know that it would make no difference to her whether she were left alone or accompanied. If the injection were given intravenously, Mrs Jordan would have been dead within a few minutes. If it had been given intramuscularly, she would have been asleep within 15 to 30 minutes and dead within 30 minutes to an hour.
I have not found this case easy, as the evidence is uncertain on some important issues. However, taking the evidence as a whole, I have come to the conclusion that it is likely that Shipman killed Mrs Jordan.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001