The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Beatrice Jeffries
Introduction
Mrs Beatrice Jeffries died at Godley Court, Hyde Nursing Home, Grange Road South, Hyde on Sunday, 4th
December 1994 at the age of 81. She registered as a patient of Shipman when she moved to Hyde Nursing Home, three weeks before she died. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was old age.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Marjorie Tinning, Mrs Jeffries' daughter. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Jeffries' general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Godley Court admissions and discharge register is available along with a form notifying the health authority of the death.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Jeffries was admitted to Manchester Royal Infirmary in August 1994 from her home in Clayton and remained in hospital for three months until she was discharged to Hyde Nursing Home on 14th
November 1994. It is clear from the discharge summary dated 24th
November 1994 that she was in poor health. She had a history of severe cardiac problems for which she had undergone aortic valve replacement in 1992. A pacemaker had been fitted to regularise her heartbeat. She was also diabetic and clinically depressed. At the time of her discharge, she was taking several different types of medication for her heart disease, congestive heart failure and depression. There is no reference to pain or pain-relieving medication although Mrs Tinning remembers that whilst her mother was in hospital, she was enduring a lot of pain. Mrs Tinning recalls that when her mother was transferred to Hyde Nursing Home she was very frail. Mrs Tinning did not expect her mother to live long. She visited her mother every day until her death.
Shipman examined Mrs Jeffries on 16th
November 1994 when she became his patient. The note in the visits book indicates that the staff at the home had requested a visit as Mrs Jeffries would not eat and was sick. The entry in the medical record suggests that Mrs Jeffries was eating and no particular problems are recorded. Her medication is listed. Included in the list is paracetamol but it is not clear why she needed it. On 17th
November, Mrs Jeffries' name appears in the acute prescriptions book. It appears that the staff were requesting a prescription for Temgesic for Mrs Jeffries. It was said that she was desperate for this, as paracetamol was 'not working'. As Temgesic is a moderately strong opioid analgesic, it would appear that Mrs Jeffries was in pain. The source of her pain is not clear.
Shipman visited Mrs Jeffries several times in the ensuing weeks. On 21st
November, Mrs Jeffries was
'not well'
. Shipman's diagnoses were circulatory failure and a chest infection. By 24th
November, Shipman had prescribed Oramorph but it is not clear why. Oramorph is an oral opioid analgesic solution. On 25th
November, Mrs Jeffries was prescribed diazepam, presumably in addition to her other drugs. It is not clear for what reason this was given. Shipman visited again on 28th
November. The handwritten entry is quite illegible. The computerised entry says:
'Terminal care
dehydrated concious
(
sic
)
level poor'
.
An entry dated 30th
November 1994 recorded that Mrs Jeffries was
'dying'
.
The final entry in the computerised medical records, dated 2nd
December 1994, reads:
'Medication requested
diamorphine 20mg if oramorph'
.
This note referring to diamorphine is incomplete and somewhat difficult to interpret. It may well be that diamorphine was prescribed, to be given if the Oramorph that had been prescribed some days before was insufficient for the relief of Mrs Jeffries' pain. Mrs Jeffries' name appears in Shipman's visits book on 2nd
December 1994.
The Events of 3rd
December and 4th
December 1994
Mrs Tinning stayed with her mother until midnight on 3rd
December 1994. The following morning she received a telephone call from Hyde Nursing Home at about 8am to say that her mother had died. The staff did not mention any further visit by Shipman or any other doctor.
The Hyde Nursing Home notification of death form recorded that Mrs Jeffries died at 7.40am on 4th
December. Her medication at the time of death was warfarin, diazepam, Oramorph and diamorphine hydrochloride. The remaining drugs were to be returned to the chemist. It is not clear whether Mrs Jeffries had been given any diamorphine.
The Aftermath
Mrs Tinning spoke to Shipman after her mother had died. He was looking through Mrs Jeffries' medical records and said that she had been suffering from a number of conditions. He said he would certify the cause of her mother's death as old age. Mrs Tinning did not object to that course of action.
Mrs Jeffries' death on 4th
December is not noted in her medical records.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). He stated that he had last seen Mrs Jeffries alive on 2nd
December 1994, two days before she died. The MCCD is dated 5th
December 1994.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He said that Mrs Jeffries had died at about 8am. He said that he had been Mrs Jeffries' ordinary medical attendant for three weeks and had attended her during her last illness for the same period. He said that he had last seen her alive 36 hours before the death, which would have been on 2nd
December. He said that he had seen the body about three hours after death. He said the cause of death was old age and the mode of death was a coma lasting five to six days. These answers were based on his own observations. He said that no one had been present at the death. He said that Mrs Jeffries had been
'checked 0730 alive - 0800 dead'
.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered the cremation forms and concluded that they did not give rise to suspicion.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Jeffries died of natural causes, although the precise cause of her death is not clear. She had suffered from a number of serious medical conditions. She was very frail when she was admitted to Hyde Nursing Home and was not expected to live long. She deteriorated quite quickly. Her death on 4th
December was neither sudden nor unexpected.
It is not clear precisely why Mrs Jeffries was prescribed strong pain-relieving drugs in the last two weeks of her life. It may be that she was in pain or distress. In any event, her daughter does not appear to have had any concerns about her medication.
All the evidence suggests that Shipman last saw Mrs Jeffries on 2nd
December, probably about 36 hours before her death. There is no evidence that he saw her again after that recorded visit and it is highly unlikely that he would have been called out to see her in the very early morning of 4th
December. It is therefore very unlikely that Shipman had the opportunity to give Mrs Jeffries any diamorphine on 4th
December. It is most unlikely that he caused or hastened her death.
I am sure that Mrs Tinning was right not to have been worried or suspicious about the circumstances of her mother's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001