The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ivy Jones
Introduction
Mrs Ivy Jones died in Tameside General Hospital, Ashton-under-Lyne on Wednesday, 23rd
August 1995 at the age of 64. She had been a patient of Shipman since 1988 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. The South Manchester Coroner, after a post-mortem examination but without an inquest, certified that the cause of Mrs Jones' death was congestive cardiac failure due to ischaemic heart disease with fatty infiltration of the heart.
In May 2002, Mrs Jones' brother, Mr David Haslam, provided a witness statement in connection with the death of his mother, Mrs Mary Elizabeth Haslam, who died on 7th
August 1984. When interviewed for the purpose of making that statement, Mr Haslam expressed concern about Mrs Jones' death.
The Inquiry has considered the witness statement provided by Mr Haslam. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Jones' general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has considered the coroner's documents and has obtained a report from Professor Helen Whitwell.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
In August 1995, Mrs Jones and Mr Haslam were living together at 38 Mansfield Road, Hyde. Mrs Jones was a widow and a retired care assistant. Her medical records confirm Mr Haslam's recollection that she was obese and suffered from numerous medical problems. In particular, she suffered hypertension, asthma, osteoarthritis and occasional problems with her digestion. In October 1986, she underwent surgical removal of the gall bladder.
The Days Leading up to Death
Mr Haslam recalls that his sister went to see Shipman at the Market Street Surgery about a week before she died. There is no reference in the practice documents to a consultation on 16th
August or on any occasion during that week or the previous week. I note that Shipman was on holiday over that period. Mrs Jones' name does, however, appear in the visits book for Monday, 21st
August. The computerised records for that day suggest that she was suffering symptoms of acute gastritis for which Shipman added Maalox, an antacid preparation, to Mrs Jones' already substantial list of medication.
Mr Haslam says that, about two days later, Mrs Jones began to say that she was feeling unwell and suspected that this was due to the change in her medication. She complained of stomach pains, that her head felt 'tight' and that she felt dizzy. She went to bed. The following day, she began to vomit and this continued until her death. I think that the events which Mr Haslam recalls took place over a period of about a week must in fact have taken place over two days.
Mr Haslam believes that he called Shipman out to see his sister on the day before her death. There is no record of a visit on 22nd
August and it seems likely that the visit he remembers is the one that took place on 21st
August.
The Day of the Death
According to Mr Haslam, his sister's condition changed for the worse on the morning of 23rd
August. At first, she seemed to be quite vague but by midday she had started to hallucinate and was also vomiting. She was complaining of pain. When Mr Haslam telephoned Shipman to inform him of these symptoms, he came quite quickly. Mrs Jones' name appears in the visits book with a note that she was
'not very well. Hallucinating'
.
When Shipman arrived he went up to Mrs Jones' bedroom. About five minutes later, he came downstairs and seemed quite agitated. He said that he had not thought that Mrs Jones' condition would change so rapidly. He telephoned for an ambulance. Shipman then collected all Mrs Jones' medication and left the house. At some stage he made the following entry in the handwritten medical records:
'Vomiting 5/7
(
five days
)
temperature
Admit TGH'
.
A similar entry appears in the computerised records. At some stage Shipman wrote a letter which was to accompany the patient to hospital. He said that he had seen Mrs Jones three days previously with a two-day history of vomiting. He had found no serious pathology on examination but had given Maalox. He had advised Mrs Jones to take fluids and to contact him if her condition did not settle. He was unable to explain her continued vomiting and thanked the hospital for accepting her. He listed her medication.
After Shipman's departure, Mr Haslam went to see Mrs Jones and found her vomiting, slurring her words and still in pain. She spoke to him but it was difficult for him to understand what she was saying. An ambulance arrived after about 15 minutes, but the ambulance personnel did not have the necessary equipment to transfer downstairs someone of Mrs Jones' size. A second ambulance was called. There is some suggestion that the crew said that Shipman should have advised that lifting equipment would be needed. About an hour passed before the second ambulance arrived. The first crew of paramedics stayed with Mrs Jones and treated her.
By the time the second ambulance had arrived, Mrs Jones' condition had deteriorated further. The ambulance form shows that the ambulance arrived at 1.40pm and did not depart Mansfield Road until 3.58pm. On examination, the paramedics found that Mrs Jones was conscious and responsive but was diaphretic, cyanosed and in pain. Her eyes were rolling and she was very short of breath. Her electrocardiogram (ECG) was said to be
'OK'
. She had been in bed since the previous Thursday. She was given oxygen and survived the journey to hospital. She arrived at 4.07pm. Her brother accompanied her.
The clinical record from the hospital shows that Mrs Jones was initially to be admitted to the ward but that she was taken to the resuscitation area. She was conscious but not responsive. After a short time she went into respiratory arrest and soon afterwards cardiac arrest. A resuscitation team was summoned urgently and it appears that every effort was made to revive Mrs Jones. However, she was declared dead at 4.30pm. Her death was referred to the coroner.
The Aftermath
About a week after Mrs Jones' death, Mr Haslam went to see Shipman for a check-up. Shipman was quite sympathetic. He said that he was still surprised at the extent of Mrs Jones' deterioration between his last visit and the previous one. He said that he was sorry about what had happened.
The police report to the coroner confirms that Shipman had seen Mrs Jones twice in the course of the week before she died. It notes that he knew that she was very poorly but that he had been unable to make any diagnosis. She had been taken to Tameside General Hospital but had died in the Accident and Emergency Department. It was recorded that she had a previous history of asthma, arthritis and ulcer. The time of death was recorded as 4.30pm.
A post-mortem examination was performed by Dr A S Day on 29th
August 1995. The examination revealed pronounced fatty infiltration of the heart, moderate to severe grades of atheromatous changes to the coronary artery and severe grades of atheromatous change to the aorta. The liver had multiple cysts containing clear and turbid fluid. The report concluded that the causes of death were congestive cardiac failure due to ischaemic heart disease with fatty infiltration of the heart. Fatty metamorphosis of the liver was said to be a further significant condition contributing to the death but not related to the disease or condition causing the death.
It is worth mentioning that Mrs Jones had venepuncture marks to her right cubital fossa, the dorsum of her left hand and her right ankle. These would be consistent with attempts at resuscitation having been made by the ambulance personnel or hospital staff.
The Expert Evidence
According to Professor Whitwell, the major pathology revealed by the post-mortem examination was the ischaemic heart disease. She considered that the fatty infiltration of the heart and liver would have made only a minimal contribution to the death. She said that in the absence of toxicological tests, it was not possible to say whether or not Mrs Jones had been given an injection of morphine.
Conclusion
Mrs Jones did not enjoy good health and her medical history combined with the evidence from the post-mortem examination suggests that she was vulnerable to a sudden cardiac death. There is only limited information about Mrs Jones' condition in the period immediately before her death. However, the possibility that Shipman deliberately killed Mrs Jones can be ruled out. First, Mrs Jones was still conscious for over two hours after Shipman had departed. If he had given her an overdose of opiate, she would have been unconscious within a short time. In fact, she was conscious while in the care of the paramedics and even until her arrival at hospital. Second, it would be quite atypical of Shipman to call an ambulance and despatch a patient to hospital if he had given a lethal drug. It would be more usual of him to keep the patient at home, wait until the death occurred and sign the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death.
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Jones died as the result of natural causes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001