The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Charles Henry Killan
Introduction
Mr Charles Henry Killan died at his home, 12 Bagshaw Street, Newton, Hyde on Monday, 3rd
February 1997 at the age of 90. He was a widower and lived alone. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Killan's death was left ventricular failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
In February 2000, Mr Killan's nephew, Detective Inspector David Lever of the Greater Manchester Police, contacted the police to express concerns about his uncle's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr David John Hardman (Mr Killan's next door neighbour), Ms Angela Georgina Lawrence (his home care worker) and Mr Ian Stuart Campbell (the Complaints and Claims Manager of the Greater Manchester Ambulance Service). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Killan, but an inquest was held on 27th
February 2001, at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Killan's nephew, Mr Frank Killan. The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Killan's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits book and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Despite his great age, Mr Killan was in quite good health. He lived an independent life. He ran the house with some assistance from a home care worker and would walk to the shops almost every day. His neighbour, Mr Hardman, recalls that his only problem was deafness and tinnitus. He thought Mr Killan was
'in his 70s or 80s'
.
Dr Grenville has examined the medical records with particular reference to cardiac conditions. He noted that there were references to chest pain in 1981 and 1987. An electrocardiogram (ECG) dated 1981 shows no sign of cardiac abnormality. He found a letter dated 8th
June 1959, which confirmed a posterior myocardial infarct. However, I am satisfied that this letter relates to someone else and had been mistakenly filed in Mr Killan's records. The episode of chest pain in 1987 does not appear to have been fully investigated, although Mr Killan was prescribed medication for angina from that time. Dr Grenville considers that, if Mr Killan had not suffered chest pain since 1987, he probably did not have symptomatic ischaemic heart disease. If he did not, his risk of dying of a heart attack, even at the age of 90, was not unduly high. However, Shipman was a poor record-keeper and it cannot be assumed that Mr Killan did not suffer other episodes of chest pain. As Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry, has pointed out, Mr Killan was on daily aspirin and medication for angina. For this medication to be prescribed on a continuous basis implies that Mr Killan probably had ischaemic heart disease. Dr Esmail says that this was probably mild but that Mr Killan was at some increased risk of dying a sudden cardiac death. However, there is no indication that Mr Killan was taking medication for congestive heart disease.
The Day of the Death
During the early afternoon of 3rd
February 1997, Mr Killan telephoned his home care worker, Ms Lawrence, and told her that he was feeling unwell. He asked her to telephone Shipman to request a visit. She cannot now remember the nature of his illness but the visits book at the surgery contains an entry as follows:
'CHARLES KILLAN (10723) CHOKING/DIFFICULTY BREATHING.'
On that day, probably at about 2pm, Shipman visited Mr Killan. A while later, he knocked on Mr Hardman's door and told him that Mr Killan was ill and that an ambulance was coming. He asked Mr Hardman to come in and wait with Mr Killan as he, Shipman, had to go. When Mr Hardman entered the house, he saw Mr Killan sitting in an armchair. Without looking at Mr Killan, Shipman went to the settee, on which his medical bag was open. Within the lid of the bag were a number of bottles, which Mr Hardman described as 'similar to the ones you see on television, when doctors inject a syringe and remove liquid from inside'. He closed it as if preparing to leave. When Mr Hardman looked at Mr Killan, it appeared to him that Mr Killan was already dead. He was fully dressed, sitting upright in the chair. His legs were slightly apart, his head was tilted back against the chair back, his mouth was open and his eyes closed. Mr Hardman was struck by the yellowy/bluish tinge of his skin. He said to Shipman that he thought Mr Killan was dead. Shipman walked to the chair, placed his hand briefly on Mr Killan's neck and said: 'You're right there'. He then returned to the settee, picked up his bag and excused himself, explaining that he was very busy that day and had other patients to see. He assured Mr Hardman that the ambulance had been ordered. Mr Hardman remained at the house or nearby until 4.30pm, but no ambulance arrived. Mr Campbell confirms that Shipman had never ordered one.
Exactly how contact was made with Mr Killan's relatives is not clear, but by the evening his brother, Mr Kenneth Frank Killan, and nephew, Mr Frank Killan, were aware of the death and came over to Hyde from their homes in Runcorn. By that time DI Lever, who was a relative of Mr Killan, had made arrangements for the body to be taken away.
There was no handwritten record for the day of the death. The computerised record for that day says:
'Left ventricular failure
creps jvp up gallop rythymn
(
sic
)
iv lasix 80 patient collpsed
(
sic
)
an
died 1500 hrs next door neighbour present rrelatives
(
sic
)
contacted'
.
Dr Grenville interprets this entry as meaning that Shipman heard crepitations in the lungs; the jugular venous pressure was raised; and he heard an extra abnormal heart sound. These three observations, if genuine, would indicate severe congestive heart failure or probably acute left ventricular failure.
'iv lasix 80'
means that Shipman gave 80mg Lasix, a diuretic, intravenously.
Certification
Shipman completed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), stating that the death was caused by left ventricular failure, which was due to ischaemic heart disease. He said that the left ventricular failure had been of
'?12 hours'
duration and that Mr Killan had had ischaemic heart disease for 37 years. This last assertion seems to have been based on the mistaken belief that Mr Killan had had a heart attack in 1959.
The cremation Form B, also completed by Shipman, recorded the time of death as
'1500hrs'
. Shipman said that he had attended Mr Killan during his last illness for a period of 15 to 20 minutes. He said he had seen Mr Killan alive immediately before death and had seen his body immediately after death, when he had examined it. The cause of death is recorded as on the MCCD. The mode of death was said to be syncope of two to three minutes' duration. He claimed to have based his answers relating to the cause and mode of death on his own observations and on statements made by a neighbour from 14 Bagshaw Street, who had also been present at the moment of death. That is a reference to Mr Hardman.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Esmail says that Shipman's account of the death in the records and in Form B does not make sense. A patient with ischaemic heart disease can go into acute left ventricular failure but, if that happens, the onset is sudden and dramatic and there is an immediate medical emergency. On the other hand, a patient with chronic heart failure develops symptoms over a long period of time, far longer than 12 hours. Chronic heart failure is susceptible to treatment. There is no evidence that Mr Killan had chronic heart failure. He was certainly not receiving treatment for it.
Dr Grenville observed that the complaint of choking and difficulty with breathing, as recorded in the visits book, was not wholly inconsistent with acute left ventricular failure, but said that, if Mr Killan was suffering from that condition at the time when he spoke to Ms Lawrence, the difficulty in breathing would have been so great as to be obvious and worrying to her. Dr Esmail agrees and adds that the initial complaint of choking/difficult breathing is entirely non-specific. He considers that it is unlikely that Mr Killan was in acute left ventricular failure at the time of the telephone call.
If Mr Killan was in acute left ventricular failure when Shipman arrived, Dr Grenville would have expected Shipman to summon an ambulance. Shipman claims that he gave an injection of Lasix, a powerful diuretic. Dr Grenville said that that would be appropriate treatment for someone in acute heart failure. However, at 80mg, the dose is greater than the usual 50mg dose and would have necessitated drawing up the contents of four 20mg ampoules. A modest dose of morphine or diamorphine would also have been appropriate for a patient in acute left ventricular failure as this would relieve the patient's distress and help his breathing.
Dr Grenville says that death from left ventricular failure is distressing. The patient is gasping for air and usually pulls at his clothes or tries to reach a window. Had Mr Killan died of this, it is unlikely that he would be found sitting upright in a chair fully clothed and looking peaceful. Dr Grenville recalls that, in all cases of acute left ventricular failure that he has seen, the secretions entering the lungs have been so severe that they have appeared at the mouth and nose as a bloodstained froth.
Conclusion
This case is highly suspicious. First, the death occurred when Shipman was alone with the patient. This is a most unusual and highly suspicious circumstance.
Second, although the symptoms reported to the surgery through Ms Lawrence are not inconsistent with acute left ventricular failure, they are not diagnostic of it. Mr Killan's medical history was not such as would give rise to an expectation that he would die suddenly of acute left ventricular failure. Shipman claimed he had ordered an ambulance, which would have been the appropriate thing to do if Mr Killan was in acute left ventricular failure. However, he had not ordered one.
Third, it appears likely that Shipman administered an injection of some sort to Mr Killan. In the records he claimed to have given Lasix, which would have been appropriate for acute left ventricular failure, but the dose was inappropriately large. Shipman could properly have given a small dose of diamorphine, but there is no record that he did. No reliance can be placed on the accuracy or honesty of Shipman's records.
Fourth, the mode of death was not consistent with death due to heart failure, but was entirely consistent with death by morphine poisoning.
Fifth, Shipman did not make any proper examination before declaring Mr Killan dead. Unless he already knew Mr Killan was dead, he would have had to examine his eyes, pulse and heart in order to establish death.
Taking all these factors into account, I consider that the overwhelming likelihood is that Shipman killed Mr Killan. I am sure he did so.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001