The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Alice Christine Kitchen
Introduction
Mrs Alice Christine Kitchen died at her home, 3 Kirkstone Road, Hyde on Friday, 17th
June 1994 at the age of 66 (although there is a suggestion that she may have been 70). She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
In August 1998, Mrs Kitchen's son, Mr Joseph Kitchen, contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances of his mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Joseph Kitchen and Mr Michael Edward Paul Kitchen (Mrs Kitchen's sons), Mrs Margaret Hewitt (her neighbour), Ms Connie Helen Raphael (Mr Michael Kitchen's former partner), Mr Stephen Anthony Strong (a family friend), Mr Peter Greenwood (an ambulance technician) and Mr Robert George Murphy (an ambulance paramedic), both with the Greater Manchester Ambulance Service. Mrs Kitchen's body was exhumed and the remains were examined by Dr John David Rutherford, consultant forensic pathologist. Tissue samples were sent for analysis by a forensic scientist, Miss Julie Marie Evans. Preliminary analysis of the muscle and liver gave an indication of the possible presence of morphine, but it was not possible to confirm this unequivocally. Owing to the advanced state of decomposition and ambiguous tissue results, Miss Evans felt unable to say whether morphine was a factor in the death. Dr Rutherford concluded that the cause of death could not be ascertained, but considered that the toxicological finding of possible presence of morphine was sufficient to raise doubts about the manner in which Mrs Kitchen died. The police also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Kitchen but an inquest was held on 29th
August 2000 at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing. Mr Michael Kitchen there confirmed that his mother was born on 23rd
April 1928.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Kitchen's daughters, Ms Philomena Bardsley and Mrs Angela Harrison. Additional statements have been taken from Mr Michael Kitchen and Ms Raphael. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Kitchen's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Kitchen had been a widow for many years and lived with her sons, Michael and Bernard Kitchen. She had a long history of psychiatric problems for which she took medication. According to Mr Michael Kitchen, she also suffered from asthma for which she used an inhaler. He says she had angina, although her medical records do not confirm this. The records do confirm that Mrs Kitchen was admitted to hospital suffering from left ventricular failure in September 1993. She had a hysterectomy in May 1994, about five weeks before her death. The medical records do not suggest that Mrs Kitchen suffered from high blood pressure and Mr Michael Kitchen says she did not take medication for that condition. He says that she regularly called the doctor with minor ailments.
Mrs Kitchen's medical records suggest that she saw Shipman on two occasions during the last two weeks of her life, once at home and once at the surgery. The reasons for these supposed consultations are not clear. Mr Michael Kitchen has no recollection of these consultations and doubts whether they occurred. However, it has not been possible to check whether these records were made at the time they are supposed to have been made. There was no audit trail facility on the computer in 1994.
The Day of the Death
It appears that, at some time on 17th
April, Mrs Kitchen must have telephoned the surgery to ask for a visit. There is no entry in the visits book but a Post-it note requesting Shipman to visit Mrs Kitchen that day was found at the surgery. This had been written by the receptionist, Mrs Carol Chapman. It suggests that Mrs Kitchen was having trouble with the nerves in her legs.
At about 1.30pm, as he was leaving the house to return to work after lunch, Mr Michael Kitchen spoke to his mother through her bedroom door. At that time, she said she had gone to have a lie down on the bed. This was not surprising as she was convalescing after her operation. She sounded quite well. Ms Connie Raphael spoke to Mrs Kitchen from her place of work at some time between 3pm and 4.15pm. Mrs Kitchen said that she had a cold. Although Ms Raphael told the police that Mrs Kitchen told her that the doctor had been to see her, she has told the Inquiry that that was not so and her police statement contained an error. Mrs Kitchen did not say anything about a visit from the doctor. Mr Strong says that Mrs Kitchen telephoned him, seeking to speak to her son, Bernard, during the late afternoon on what he now believes was the day of Mrs Kitchen's death. He cannot be more precise about the time. Mrs Hewitt, a neighbour, saw Shipman leaving Mrs Kitchen's house at about 4pm.
Mr Michael Kitchen returned from work at about 6.30pm. He found his mother sitting on the sofa in the living room. She was wearing day clothes. Her head was slumped to one side and she appeared to be asleep. She looked peaceful although she had been sick. Her glasses were near her hand and there was a half-drunk cup of tea on a tray on the edge of the sofa. Also on the tray were all Mrs Kitchen's tablets. Nearby, there was an ashtray with a half-smoked cigarette. Mr Kitchen touched his mother and found that she was dead. She felt cold. On the mantelpiece was a note from Shipman, saying that he had visited Mrs Kitchen. He said that she had had a mild stroke but she had refused to go to hospital. The note asked her son to contact Shipman on his return from work.
Mr Michael Kitchen called an ambulance. The paramedics examined Mrs Kitchen and confirmed that she was dead. They also saw the note and were surprised, as they had never seen such a letter written by a medical practitioner.
Shipman was called to the scene. The police had also been called but Shipman told them there was no need for them to come, as he would be able to sign the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). He told the family that it was a blessing that Mrs Kitchen had died, as when he had seen her earlier she was paralysed down one side and was slurring her words. She would have been in a wheelchair if she had survived. He was very businesslike. He told the family that no inquest was required.
Shipman's note of the day of the death is extremely brief. It reads:
'CVA - cerebral artery occlusion'
'l
(
left or leg
)
weakness speech slurred tluk
(
to let us know
)
'
.
A second entry reads:
'O/E
(
on examination
)
- dead'
'cva
(
cerebrovascular accident
)
'
.
The Aftermath
The following day, Ms Bardsley went to see Shipman at his surgery to ask how her mother had died. Shipman said that Mrs Kitchen had telephoned at 1.30pm. He had arrived at about 4pm and realised immediately that she had had a mild stroke. She was dragging one leg and her speech was slurred. He had told her she should go to hospital but she said she would rather wait until her son came home from work at 6pm. Ms Bardsley's recollection is that Shipman said that her mother must have had a huge heart attack after he had gone. However, I think she may be mistaken in her reference to a heart attack. I think he may have said that Mrs Kitchen had had a stroke after he had left. I say that because Shipman has always said that the cause of death was a stroke. That is what he put on the MCCD.
Mrs Kitchen was buried in Hyde Cemetery.
The Expert Evidence
The post-mortem examination carried out by Dr Rutherford revealed no evidence of a cerebrovascular accident. However, he said that it was impossible to exclude a cerebral infarction because of the deterioration of the body. There was narrowing of one of the main branches of the coronary artery which could have caused heart failure or a sudden abnormality of heart rhythm resulting in sudden death. However, Dr Rutherford commented that many people continue to lead normal lives with similar degrees of coronary artery disease.
The toxicological findings revealed the possible presence of some morphine in the liver and muscle tissues, but Miss Evans concluded that the results were not conclusive. However, Dr Rutherford thought that these findings raised questions as to the manner in which death occurred, in that they were suggestive of the presence of morphine.
Dr Grenville, who had examined the medical records, suggested that it was likely that Mrs Kitchen had been given an opiate analgesic drug post-operatively about six weeks before her death. There was no evidence that she had been taking an opiate drug at the time of her discharge from hospital. However, he noted that, about four weeks before her death, Shipman prescribed Distalgesic when Mrs Kitchen complained of pain in the legs. Distalgesic contains an opiate, which would metabolise to morphine in the body. The medical note does not say how many tablets Mrs Kitchen was to take or for how long. If Mrs Kitchen had been taking Distalgesic in the days and weeks before her death, it might account for the presence of morphine in her body tissues. However, I observe that it is possible that the entry relating to Distalgesic was fabricated after the death, to explain the presence of morphine in the body, in the event of a post-mortem examination. As the audit trail facility was not in place in 1994, it is not possible to discover when the entry was made.
Conclusion
Mrs Kitchen was alive and apparently quite well during the afternoon of 17th
June when she spoke to Ms Raphael. Shipman visited and left at about 4pm. No one saw Mrs Kitchen alive or spoke to her after that time. That in itself is a highly suspicious factor.
Shipman's claim that Mrs Kitchen had had a mild stroke at the time when he saw her could be valid. It appears that she had told the receptionist that the nerves in her legs had gone. That might or might not have been an indication that she had had a stroke. However, she did not have high blood pressure and was not therefore at particular risk of suffering a stroke. If she had had a stroke, Shipman's response in leaving her alone in the house would have been inexcusable. She had a large family, any of whom could have been asked to sit with her. In my view, it is unlikely that Mrs Kitchen suffered a stroke that afternoon. Even if she had had a mild stroke, one would not expect her to die suddenly. The type of mild stroke that Shipman described does not usually lead to sudden death. As Dr Grenville said in his generic evidence to the Inquiry, if such strokes do progress to death, they usually do so over a period of two to three days. It would be highly improbable that Mrs Kitchen would suffer two different types of stroke on the same day.
I cannot attach much weight to the suspicion that there was morphine in the body, as there is a possibility that there could have been traces of an opiate drug taken for therapeutic purposes.
Taking all factors into account, I have reached the same conclusion as the coroner. Like him, I am satisfied so as to be sure that Shipman killed Mrs Kitchen.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001