The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Fred Kellett
Introduction
Mr Fred Kellett died at his home, 26 Knott Lane, Gee Cross, Hyde on Tuesday, 31st
December 1985 at the age of 79. He was still married, though his wife lived in a nursing home in Denton. He had probably been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. He held Shipman in high regard. Shipman certified the cause of Mr Kellett's death as coronary thrombosis due to acute bronchitis and lymphocytic leukaemia.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's conviction, Mrs Valerie Wood (formerly Mrs Valerie Mallinson, Mr Kellett's niece) contacted the police expressing concern about Mr Kellett's death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Wood.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing Mr Kellett's death but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Wood. Mr Kellett's medical records have not survived but the Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1985, to the cremation forms and to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil.
This decision was made following consideration of the papers and without oral evidence.
Personal Background
Approximately two years before his death, Mr Kellett was diagnosed as suffering from chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, for which he was receiving oral medication. He also suffered from mild diabetes, which was controlled by diet.
Mr Kellett used to visit his wife every day, usually travelling by bus. Mrs Wood was close to her uncle and would often take him on these visits. Her mother would do his cooking.
In 1985, Mr Kellett spent most of the Christmas period with Mrs Wood. She noticed that Mr Kellett had a cold and had developed a bad cough.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Wood became concerned about Mr Kellett's cough and, on the morning of 31st
December, she contacted the Donneybrook Surgery and asked if Shipman would call round to see him at home. The intended visit is recorded in the visits book. At approximately 11am, Mrs Wood telephoned her uncle to see if the doctor had arrived. She wanted to fetch his prescription. She asked her uncle to telephone her when the doctor had gone. As they were speaking, Mr Kellett told her that Shipman had just arrived. Mrs Wood said that she would see her uncle later and ended the conversation.
Approximately 45 minutes later, whilst she was still at work, Mrs Wood received a telephone call from Shipman. Shipman said that he had visited Mr Kellett, who had been taken ill in his presence. Shipman said that, whilst he was present at the house, Mr Kellett had 'sat down in his chair and died'.
Mrs Wood collected her then husband, Mr Mallinson, and went to her uncle's house, arriving a few minutes after the telephone call from Shipman. Shipman said that Mr Kellett had let him in and he then repeated what he had said before, that Mr Kellett had 'sat down in the chair and died'. Mrs Wood said to Shipman that it was strange because he had said the same thing to her 12 months previously after the death of her next door neighbour, Mrs Ada Ashworth, who had died on 27th
November 1984. Shipman said something like, 'I'm very sorry'. I have found that Shipman killed Mrs Ashworth.
Mrs Wood thinks that she then telephoned the undertakers. She did not want to see her uncle's body. Her husband told her that he looked peaceful sitting in his chair.
Mrs Wood's mother said that there would be money in the house. When Mrs Wood and her mother cleared out the house, there was no sign of any money.
Certification
Shipman certified that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis, due to acute bronchitis, resulting from chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Diabetes mellitus was stated to be a significant condition contributing to the death but not related to its immediate cause.
On Form B of the cremation certificate, Shipman stated that he last saw Mr Kellett alive 20 minutes before the death, which had occurred at 11.30am. He also stated that both he and a next door neighbour were present at the moment of death. The only neighbours who might possibly have been present would have been Mr and Mrs Ashbrook, who were then alive but who had both died by the time the police investigated Mr Kellett's death. However, Shipman had not told Mrs Wood that a neighbour was present. In my view, it is inconceivable that neighbours who had been present at the death would not have spoken to Mrs Wood afterwards.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker found the death highly suspicious because of the information contained in the cremation Form B.
Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry, was asked to advise on whether it was feasible for a person of Mr Kellett's age to suffer from chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, treated only with oral medication, and yet be fit and well. He said it was. He also advised that a person with that condition could die quite suddenly, after an illness of a few days' duration, but not as suddenly as Mr Kellett had died. He advised that the death of Mr Kellett was quite atypical of a death caused by leukaemia. It is possible that Mr Kellett could have died suddenly from a coronary thrombosis, not related to leukaemia, but the manner of his death as described by Shipman does not appear to have been typical of that.
Conclusion
I accept the evidence of Mrs Wood that her uncle was in quite good health immediately before his death apart from suffering from a cold and cough. I accept that he was up and talking to her on the telephone a very short time before his death.
Dr Esmail has advised that it is highly improbable that Mr Kellett died from the causes stated by Shipman. It is most unusual for a person suffering a coronary thrombosis to sit down and die. For a very sudden death to occur during a visit from a general practitioner is obviously a most unusual occurrence and a remarkable coincidence. Yet, it is an event that Shipman claimed occurred quite frequently. Here, Shipman's account is quite incredible. He appears to claim that Mr Kellett suffered a fatal heart attack as he walked through the door. No attempt was made to resuscitate Mr Kellett and an ambulance was not called. Were an event really to occur such as Shipman claims, one would expect the doctor to decline to sign a certificate of cause of death and to report the death to the coroner. Instead, Shipman signed the certificate.
Mr Kellett's appearance in death is not typical of that seen after a sudden cardiac death. It is entirely typical of that seen in many of Shipman's victims who are known to have been killed by diamorphine injection.
In completing the cremation Form B, Shipman sought to suggest that he had not been alone with the patient at the moment of death. In my view, that was almost certainly a lie, designed to allay any possible suspicion in official quarters about the sudden death. Shipman is known to have told such lies on many occasions.
I am sure that Shipman was responsible for Mr Kellett's death. The overwhelming likelihood is that the death was caused by a lethal injection of diamorphine. Although there is no direct evidence of Shipman's illicit possession of diamorphine in 1985, there is evidence that he obtained opiates in the 1970s and in the 1990s. I infer that he was capable of acquiring morphine or diamorphine during the 1980s as well. I cannot say whether any property was taken from Mr Kellett's home after his death. The evidence is inconclusive.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001