The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ethel May Kellett
Introduction
Mrs Ethel May Kellett died at her home, 7 Bankfield, Newton, Hyde in May 1997 at the age of 74. According to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), she died on Tuesday, 13th
May but it seems likely that her death occurred on Monday, 12th
May 1997. She had re-registered as one of Shipman's patients in February 1997 having moved back to Hyde after living for some years in Wales. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to arteriosclerosis.
In September 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mrs Kellett's family expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Janice Kellett (Mrs Kellett's daughter-in-law) and from Detective Sergeant John Ashley who carried out an audit trail on the practice computer. The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Kellett, but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Christopher Leslie Kellett (Mrs Kellett's son), Mrs Janice Kellett (his wife), and Mrs Phyllis Field (a former neighbour of Mrs Kellett). The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Kellett's general practitioner medical records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Kellett was troubled by mild arthritis in her hips but was otherwise well. She had a significant family history of heart disease and there are suggestions that she herself suffered from hypertension and ischaemic heart disease. Both her father and brother died of heart attacks at a relatively young age.
Mrs Kellett returned to live in Hyde in January 1997. She was a widow and lived alone. She was a 'buoyant character' who did all her own housework and shopping. She would often take a bus into Hyde and was starting to become involved in the local community. She enjoyed gardening and attended needlework classes in Stalybridge. According to the family, shortly after Mrs Kellett's return to Hyde, Shipman sent her to Tameside General Hospital for a check-up. Mrs Kellett informed her family that her 'MoT' test results from the hospital were 'fine'. In fact, it appears from the records that she was sent to hospital for a chest x-ray, which was satisfactory. The remaining tests appear to have been conducted on blood specimens. All the results were satisfactory.
Mrs Kellett's relatives knew that she saw Shipman every week or two to have her blood pressure monitored. She had mentioned that Shipman had prescribed her tablets for her blood pressure but she said that she had stopped taking them because they made her feel ill. She mentioned that he had given her a spray for her angina. She also said that he had on one occasion kindly called to see her unannounced.
Dr Grenville has considered the general practitioner records. They show that Mrs Kellett first had high blood pressure in about 1966. It appears, however, that treatment for this was stopped some time after May 1969. The records suggest that, following her return to the Hyde area, Mrs Kellett was first seen by Shipman on 11th
February 1997 for a check-up. Her blood pressure was noted to be significantly raised at 190/130. Shipman then instituted treatment with Enalapril and provided a glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) spray for angina. The blood pressure remained high, possibly because Mrs Kellett refused to take her medication. Mrs Kellett's blood pressure was recorded in the computerised records on nine occasions between 12th
February 1997 and her death on 12th
or 13th
May 1997 and on each occasion it was significantly elevated. An electrocardiogram (ECG), taken on 20th
March 1997, showed changes consistent with ischaemic heart disease.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
Mr Kellett and his wife visited his mother on Saturday, 10th
May 1997. She appeared to be her 'usual self' and was very interested in the new car which the family had bought the previous day. She had been out to buy some plants and was looking forward to sitting in her deckchair in the garden over the summer months. She explained that she had visited Shipman in the previous week and was particularly happy because he had apparently told her that she would 'be here for a long time yet'. She also mentioned that he had given her a spray but she did not know what it was for. Her son assumed that it was for angina, although she told him that she did not use it.
The computerised medical record for 7th
May (which was the Wednesday of that week) shows that Mrs Kellett had attended the Market Street Surgery for blood pressure monitoring. The record continues:
'CHEST PAIN MONDAY 5/7/97 INCREASE INOVACE
(
sic
)
20mg ON ADD BENDRO2. 5 SEE 1/52'
.
According to DS Ashley, this entry was made on 7th
May. I interpret the entry to suggest that Mrs Kellett had had chest pain, probably on Monday, 5th
May and that Shipman increased her dosage of Innovace and added bendrofluazide.
At some time during the week before her death, Mrs Kellett told Mrs Field that Shipman had told her that she had angina.
The Day of the Death
The telephone billing records reveal that a call was made from Mrs Kellett's telephone to the surgery at 8.34am on Monday, 12th
May. She was very likely telephoning to request a visit. Within the medical records is an undated visit request slip that reads:
'Ethel Kellett
Query Slight Stroke'
.
The visits book for that day contains the following entry:
'Ethel Kellett 7 Bankfield - off Carter St
Can't walk - slight stroke'
.
The computerised records show two entries dated 12th
May 1997. The first reads as follows:
'Stroke and cerebrovascular accident unspecified
r side face leg arm 150/90 to stay at home'
.
There is a fuller entry in the Lloyd George cards which reads:
'Visited 1400 hrs
(R) CVA face arm leg
yesterday feels better today
150/90 power tone grip
R side
Plantar
(R)
(L)
P.U. BO ok
Speech slurred'
.
Then continued on a separate sheet:
'Discussed options
1.
2
3
Hospital - not happy
“Home” to consider
to stay at home - can get
up walks with difficulty
can cope with food
to take tablets will review
in 48 hours or earlier if she lets
us know'
.
I interpret these entries to suggest that Shipman had visited Mrs Kellett at about 2pm on Monday, 12th
May. She had suffered a stroke which had affected her in the face, arm and leg on the right side. She said this had occurred the previous day and she now felt better. Her blood pressure was 150/90. Her power, tone and grip were reduced on the right side. The plantar reflexes were upgoing on the right side and downgoing on the left. She had passed urine and opened her bowels. Her speech was slurred. Shipman discussed options for care. He suggested hospital but Mrs Kellett was not happy about that. He also suggested a home of some sort, which Mrs Kellett agreed to think about. Shipman suggests that Mrs Kellett's preference was to stay at home, where she thought she could manage. She would take her tablets and Shipman would see her again in two days' time, or earlier if she were to let him know.
The Aftermath
On the afternoon of Tuesday, 13th
May 1997, Mr Kellett was at work when the police arrived to tell him that his mother had died. They said that Shipman had told them of the death. Their Archived Incident Report, created at
'1447'
hours on 13th
May 1997, discloses that it was Shipman who had discovered the death and contains a recital of events that clearly came from Shipman:
'DR SHIPMAN WAS AT THE ADDRESS OVER THE WEEKEND AS
ETHEL KELLETT HAD HAD A STROKE AND HAD ADVISED HER
HE WOULD ATTEND AT THE ADDRESS AGAIN TODAY WITH A
VIEW TO ADMITTING HER TO HOSPITAL
WHEN DR SHIPMAN HAS ATTENDED AT THE ADDRESS HE HAS
FOUND ETHEL TO OF
(
sic
)
DIED
HE HAS ISSUED THE DEATH CERTIFICATE AND HAS FOUND A
DIARY CONTAINING ETHELS SONS DETAILS AS ON PAGE
1...DR SHIPMAN HAS THE KEYS FOR THE ADDRESS WHICH
HE WILL TAKE BACK TO THE DOCTORS SURGERY FOR THE
SON TO COLLECT...THE SURGERY IS AT 21 MARKET STREET
HYDE NEXT DOOR TO THE CHEMIST...IT CLOSES AT 1800 HRS D
TEL FOR THE SONS ADDRESS IS
(
given
)
THERE IS NO REPLY AT THIS TIME
DELAY FOR 30 MINUTES
FOR ALLOCATION
MR KELLETT LOCATED AT HIS PLACE OF WORK
MESSAGE PASSED AND WILL ARRANGE COLLECTION OF THE
KEYS FROM THE DOCTORS'
.
The police told Mr Kellett that he should go to Shipman's surgery some time after 6pm, when Shipman would be able to provide him with all the relevant information. Mr Kellett was extremely upset and his wife went to collect him from work.
Mr and Mrs Kellett arrived at Shipman's surgery at about 5.50pm and spoke to Shipman about 30 minutes later. He explained that he had treated Mrs Kellett for high blood pressure but that he had managed to keep it under control. He showed them Mrs Kellett's medical records, including the card where he had written her blood pressure on various dates. Mrs Kellett has told the Inquiry that these recordings were written on the outside of the Lloyd George card envelope. I cannot find a document answering that description. The only document on which a number of blood pressure readings are recorded is a computer printout. He may have disposed of the card which she saw.
Shipman then asked the Kelletts to go to Mrs Kellett's bungalow and he followed them in his own vehicle. At Mrs Kellett's home, Shipman told the Kelletts that Mrs Kellett had telephoned on the Monday morning to ask for a home visit. This is not, of course, what he had told the police. He said he found Mrs Kellett in her bed and it was obvious to him that she had suffered a slight stroke. She herself realised that she had had a stroke. He said that he had wanted her to go into hospital for a few days to recover, but she did not want to go. Shipman then said, 'and with that she got out of bed and walked from the bedroom to the living room holding onto the wall and furniture, and she said, “I'm alright, I will make myself a cup of tea and call my son”'. Shipman said that he had told Mrs Kellett he would visit her the following day to see how she was. He then said, 'I came back like I said I would, knocked on the door, there was no reply. I tried it and it was unlocked. I opened it and shouted in then went in. As soon as I went into the room
(
the bedroom
)
I realised that she was dead'. Mrs Janice Kellett says that at some stage Shipman said that Mrs Kellett had probably suffered a massive stroke and would have died quickly and painlessly. She recalls that he said he thought she had died at about 3am. He said that no post-mortem examination was needed. Before leaving Mrs Kellett's house, Shipman advised Mr Kellett to take all his mother's valuables with him as it was known that burglars would target a house from which a body had recently been removed.
At some stage Shipman said that, after he had discovered the death, he locked the door and took the keys with him and it was Shipman's receptionist who gave the Kelletts the key. When they arrived, Mr Kellett went into the bedroom. He found his mother's body, lying on the bed, completely covered by a quilt. Mr Kellett noticed that his mother's face was pale but had not sagged.
Mrs Janice Kellett has told the Inquiry that shortly after Shipman left, Mrs Phyllis Field, Mrs Kellett's neighbour, telephoned to ask how Mrs Kellett was. Mrs Janice Kellett explained that her mother-in-law had died. Mrs Field said that she had seen Shipman at Mrs Kellett's house the previous day whilst she had been cleaning her windows. She said that, after he had gone, she telephoned Mrs Kellett to see how she was but there was no reply. She said that she telephoned again during the course of the afternoon and once more in the evening, but there was still no answer.
Mrs Field told the Inquiry that she saw Shipman's 'big red car' outside Mrs Kellett's house on the morning of the day of her death. Her initial account of her attempts to make contact after his departure was that after she had seen him leave, she telephoned Mrs Kellett but was unable to get a reply. She continued to ring throughout the rest of the morning and eventually spoke to Mrs Kellett at about 3pm. Mrs Kellett said that she had been unwell throughout the night and had called Shipman out. However, this information is now known to be incorrect. The billing records for Mrs Field's telephone reveal that Mrs Field did not connect with Mrs Kellett's number at all on 12th
May. The first connected call since 13th
February was at 7.52pm on 13th
May. The Inquiry therefore sought to clarify Mrs Field's evidence and it became apparent that her recollection was very confused. She could not confirm that she had seen Shipman's car outside Mrs Kellett's house. I do not think it would be safe to rely on any aspect of her evidence, except that I do place some reliance on what Miss Janice Kellett remembers having been told by her on 13th
May.
Mrs Janice Kellett says that she has often wondered how Shipman gained access to the house unless her mother-in-law had let him in. She says that it would have been extremely unusual for her mother-in-law to leave her front door unlocked because she was very safety conscious. She has also never understood why Mrs Kellett did not telephone the family if Shipman had told her that she ought to go into hospital or a home. She had a telephone on the table next to her bed. Further, she always found it 'odd' that the family did not find any cash in Mrs Kellett's bungalow except for some coppers in her purse. She could not believe that Mrs Kellett would have left herself without any money.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and certified that the death had occurred on 13th May. He said he had last seen Mrs Kellett alive on 12th
May. The cause of death was cerebrovascular accident, which was due to arteriosclerosis. He said that hypertension had contributed to the death. The interval between the onset of the stroke and the death was 48 hours.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that death had occurred at about 3am on 14th
May 1997. However, the date was later altered by someone else, probably the medical referee, to 13th
May 1997. He said he had been Mrs Kellett's ordinary medical attendant for three months and had attended her during her last illness for about 24 hours. He had last seen her about 12 hours before her death and saw the body about 12 hours after death. He made a complete external examination of it. He said that the mode of death was a coma of
'hours'
duration. When asked to what extent his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on the statements of others, he wrote:
'Seen 14:00 hours 12.5.97 by self
by neighbour about 1800 hours
found dead in bed at 1430 hours
Self
neighbour'
.
Shipman also said that no one was present at the moment of death. In Form B, Shipman was saying that he had seen Mrs Kellett at about 2pm or 3pm on 12th
May, at which time she had suffered a stroke. He then suggested that she had been seen by a neighbour at about 6pm on 12th
May. He did not identify the neighbour, as he should have done. He then suggested that Mrs Kellett had been found in bed on 13th
May by him and a neighbour. There are two statements here about which I am highly suspicious. There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman was with a neighbour when he found the body. I think that was a lie. I also think Shipman was probably lying when he said that a neighbour had seen Mrs Kellett at about 6pm.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville has explained that because of her raised blood pressure, her family history and her ECG changes, Mrs Kellett was at a very high risk of suffering a stroke or a heart attack.
Dr Grenville says that Shipman's handwritten note of 12th
May 1997 is a detailed description of a stroke. He has interpreted the options Shipman noted to mean that Mrs Kellett declined the offer of an admission to hospital, that she would consider a residential or nursing home but that, in the mean time, she wished to stay at home. Dr Grenville says that if Shipman thought that Mrs Kellett should be in hospital, it was unprofessional of him not to seek to persuade her further or to seek her permission to contact relatives, friends or neighbours to try to persuade her. Dr Grenville believes it would have been appropriate to admit Mrs Kellett to hospital since, even if her stroke was mild and she was coping, she lived alone and there was a danger of her stroke progressing. It seems to me that at the very least, Shipman should have alerted Mrs Kellett's family to her need for care and supervision.
As Dr Grenville notes, there is good evidence that Mrs Kellett had had or was having a stroke when she telephoned the surgery on the morning of 12th
May. How serious this was cannot be ascertained, as Shipman's notes are not to be taken at face value. If the stroke was as serious as Shipman's record suggested, Dr Grenville says that Shipman's response was inappropriate and insufficient. That he should fail even to contact a relative suggests to me that the stroke might not have been anything like as serious as Shipman suggested. It suggests that Shipman had killed Mrs Kellett and did not wish a relative to come to the house, as he did not wish Mrs Kellett's body to be found for some time. Dr Grenville has observed that Shipman's conclusion that Mrs Kellett had died of a cerebrovascular accident due to arteriosclerosis with hypertension as an associated condition, is justified only if his records of the evolving stroke are accurate.
In his statement to the police, Dr Grenville explained that it would be quite impossible for Shipman to estimate the time of death of a patient who was found dead in the afternoon of 13th
May and who had not been seen alive for at least 18 hours prior to the death, probably longer.
Professor Richard Baker has classified this death as highly suspicious on account of both the cremation documentation and the medical notes and records.
Conclusion
There are some suspicious features surrounding this death. The most obvious is the temporal association between Shipman's visit and the discovery of Mrs Kellett's body. There is no evidence that anyone saw Mrs Kellett alive or spoke to her after Shipman's visit on 12th
May. Such evidence as there is, appears likely to have been fabricated by Shipman in Form B so as to create the impression that he had not been the last person to see Mrs Kellett alive. He said that a neighbour saw her alive at 6pm, whereas it seems very likely that Mrs Field tried but failed to make contact with her. He also said that a neighbour was with him when he found the body, which is inconsistent with the other evidence, including the telephone account he gave to the police.
It is clear that Mrs Kellett was at high risk of suffering from a cerebrovascular accident or heart attack. Further, the visits book and the visits request slip indicate that Mrs Kellett herself recognised that she was experiencing a stroke when she telephoned the surgery on the morning of 12th
May 1997. Shipman's detailed note, if true, does record a developing stroke. However, it is not at all clear that the note is a genuine record of Mrs Kellett's condition. If she had been worried about herself, as she would have been if she had had slurred speech and significant weakness on the right side, she would have telephoned her son just as Shipman told Mrs Janice Kellett that Mr Kellett had said he intended to. Also, I have learned to be suspicious of any medical record in which Shipman claims that his patient was reluctant to be admitted to hospital. Of course I accept that patients do sometimes refuse to go to hospital. However, I have seen so many such entries in cases where I have had to conclude that Shipman has killed his patient, that I now regard such a record as a suspicious feature. Shipman has repeatedly used this device as a means of explaining the death that is soon to be discovered.
Shipman's claim that Mrs Kellett had left her door unlocked, so that he was able to gain access on 13th
May, is also a highly suspicious factor especially had she been seen alive by a neighbour at 6pm. She would never, I am sure, have retired to bed with her door unlocked. Mrs Janice Kellett says her mother-in-law was safety conscious. I suspect that Mrs Kellett let Shipman in on 12th
May and that he either left the door unlocked when he left after killing her or that he took a key with him and let himself in again on the 13th
. He had certainly found a key by the time he reported the death to the police. He might well have found it the day before. This factor tends to suggest that Shipman was the last person to see Mrs Kellett alive and that her death occurred in his presence. When he did report the death to the police, he said he had visited over the weekend but made no mention of the visit on the Monday. This, again, is highly suspicious.
I cannot rule out the theoretical possibility that Mrs Kellett died of a stroke. She was certainly at high risk of doing so and she was exhibiting the signs and symptoms of a stroke on the morning of 12th
May. I believe, however, that Mrs Kellett was dead shortly after Shipman's departure on the afternoon of 12th
May. For her to have died naturally so soon after his departure would represent a remarkable coincidence, so remarkable in fact that I am sure she did not do so. I am sure that Shipman unlawfully killed her. She had been his patient for three months.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001