The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Alice Kennedy
Introduction
Mrs Alice Kennedy died at her home, 34 Ogden Court, Frank Street, Hyde on Monday, 9th
January 1995 at the age of 88. She had been widowed some months earlier. Mrs Kennedy had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
In October 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mrs Christine Simpson, the warden at Ogden Court, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of Mrs Kennedy's death. The police investigated the death and obtained statements from Mrs Simpson, Mrs Patricia Mary Higgins (Mrs Kennedy's daughter) and Mrs Joan Hopwood (Mrs Higgins' friend).
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Kennedy but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Higgins, Mrs Hopwood, Mrs Simpson and Mrs Kennedy's son, Mr Terence Kennedy. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Kennedy's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Kennedy lived in sheltered accommodation. She suffered from Parkinson's disease and was quite frail. Members of her family recall that she also suffered from high blood pressure. Mrs Higgins used to visit her at least once a day to prepare her breakfast and lunch and to make sure that she took her medication. Mrs Kennedy only went out about once a week, to play bingo.
Mrs Kennedy's medical notes suggest that there was nothing seriously wrong with her, although there are two entries relating to congestive heart failure. The later of these is dated 6th
July 1994, when the handwritten record shows that there was some ankle swelling and slightly raised jugular venous pressure. Blood pressure was 140/90, which is not unduly high. Heart sounds were normal. Shipman recorded that the patient was well, she had opened her bowels, was passing urine and sleeping well. Plainly she was not very poorly at that time. Shipman did not visit her regularly after that. Mrs Kennedy's blood pressure was taken on 30th
August 1994, and was recorded as 110/80. She had an influenza injection on 4th
October 1994. On 8th
November 1994, the record suggests that Shipman visited to discuss rehousing. That is odd, as Mrs Kennedy was already living in sheltered accommodation with the benefit of warden supervision. Thereafter, Shipman did not visit until the day of the death.
The Day of the Death
On Monday, 9th
January 1995, Mrs Higgins visited her mother early in the morning before going to work, and again at lunchtime. She found her to be in her usual state of health.
There is an entry in the surgery visits book for 9th
January 1995, which suggests that Shipman was to
'revisit'
Mrs Kennedy that day. The reason for that revisit remains obscure, which arouses some suspicion. Shipman certainly did visit on that day. Some time between about 3pm and 3.30pm, Shipman telephoned Mrs Higgins and told her that he had been to visit Mrs Kennedy and was worried because she did not seem well. Mrs Higgins said that she had seemed perfectly well at lunchtime. Shipman said that it was not necessary for Mrs Higgins to visit her mother straight away but advised her to keep an eye on her. This was a very unusual thing to say because Shipman would have known that Mrs Higgins and Mrs Simpson, the warden at Ogden Court, would normally do so anyway.
Mrs Higgins tried to telephone her mother during the afternoon and became increasingly worried when there was no reply. At about 5pm, she left work with her friend, Mrs Hopwood, and went to her mother's home, arriving at about 5.10pm. Mrs Higgins went into the house and found her mother seated in her chair, obviously dead, though with her glasses still on. She looked peaceful and composed. Her sudden death was a shock to those who knew her.
Mrs Higgins telephoned Market Street Surgery and informed the staff, who said that Shipman would attend after the afternoon surgery. He arrived at about 6pm-6.30pm. He said, 'I didn't expect this', emphasising the word 'this'. He did not examine Mrs Kennedy at all. He said that he would be in a position to issue a certificate of cause of death because he had seen Mrs Kennedy that day.
The computerised records for 9th
January 1995 show that Shipman diagnosed a transient cerebral ischaemic episode on the right side, that he had a chat with Mrs Kennedy's daughter, Mrs Higgins, and that either Mrs Kennedy or her daughter were
'tluk
(
to let us know
)
'
. What they were to let him know about is not apparent. The date on which this computer entry was made cannot be verified, as the audit trail facility had not been installed at this time. A small stroke or transient ischaemic attack does not, of course, feature anywhere in the death certification documents.
The handwritten notes for that day read as follows:
'9.1.95
140/90 HSI II ankle oedema
present. JVP 0
(
illegible
)
well odd chest pain
(L) arm if moves about
Review in 3/12 TLUK'
'9.1.95
18.30 - certified death
dead about
3
/
4
hour say 17.30
old age
CHF Parkinsonism'
.
I interpret these records to mean that, when Shipman examined Mrs Kennedy on 9th
January 1995, he found her blood pressure was 140/90, which is not at all bad for a woman of her age. The heart sounds were normal. There was some swelling of the ankles. The jugular venous pressure was normal. There was a report of not feeling well and having an odd chest pain going into the arm if she moved about. She was to be reviewed in three months' time and was to let him know about something unspecified.
The second note suggests that later that day, at about 6.30pm, Shipman attended and certified that death had occurred at about 5.30pm. The causes were old age, congestive heart failure and Parkinson's disease. The entry recording
'17.30'
is written over an earlier entry
'15.30'
. There must be a suspicion that Shipman knew and inadvertently wrote down the real time of death, which may well have been about 3.30pm.
Certification
The following day, Shipman signed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), stating that the death was due to old age. Congestive heart failure of five years' duration and Parkinsonism of six years' duration were said to be conditions which had contributed to the death but were not related to the cause of death. Mrs Kennedy's son, Mr Kennedy, took the MCCD to the register office at Dukinfield Town Hall, where it was accepted without question. Dr John Grenville has described the circumstances in which 'old age' is acceptable as a cause of death. Mrs Kennedy had not declined gradually towards death and had not suffered multiple organ failure. Old age was not an acceptable cause of death in her case.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Kennedy had died at about 5.30pm on 9th
January 1995 and that he had attended her for six months during her last illness. It is hard to know what that last illness was supposed to be. It cannot have been old age. If it was supposed to be congestive heart failure, the medical records indicate that the onset was several years before and Shipman had suggested on the MCCD that Mrs Kennedy had had congestive heart failure for five years. There is nothing in the medical records to suggest any increase in the severity of the congestive heart failure about six months before death. The entry for 6th
July 1994 relates to congestive heart failure but Shipman has summarised it in the computerised record as
'all OK'
and there is no further reference to congestive heart failure until the death.
Shipman also stated that the mode of death was syncope lasting only seconds. This must have been pure speculation, as Shipman had also recorded that no one had been present at the moment of death. Part of his reasoning seems to be that Mrs Kennedy had made no attempt to pull the warden alarm. It is very surprising indeed to find such a sudden death in a case where old age is certified as being the cause of death. Shipman said that Mrs Higgins nursed her mother during her last illness, although the care that she provided was not in fact in the nature of nursing care at all.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker found the case highly suspicious on the basis of the medical notes and records. He points out that there is no convincing history of deterioration leading up to death. Certainly the statements made to the Inquiry refute any such deterioration. Professor Baker has also found the death to be highly suspicious having considered the contents of Form B.
Conclusion
Mrs Kennedy's death was discovered soon after Shipman had visited. No one saw her alive or spoke to her after Shipman had left. That in itself is a cause for suspicion. Mrs Kennedy was very elderly and it must be accepted that old people can and do die sudden and unexpected deaths. But that she should do so in the short window of time after Shipman left and before Mrs Higgins returned would be something of a coincidence.
If Mrs Kennedy had been taken ill after Shipman's departure, she could very easily have summoned the warden by pulling on her alarm cord. That she did not do this indicates to me that she was probably not aware of any illness. This supports the suggestion that Shipman was with her as she died.
Often, in cases where Shipman killed a patient, it is found that he has fabricated, in the medical records, a florid account of an illness the signs of which were observed by him shortly before the death. Here, he has not done so. He recorded minor signs of congestive heart failure, namely swollen ankles without raised jugular venous pressure. He recorded a complaint of
'odd chest pain'
radiating into the arm at times, which sounds as if it might be a sign of some form of heart trouble. Yet, at the end of the visit, he appears to have thought so little of these signs and symptoms that he did not plan to review Mrs Kennedy for three months. I find the low key nature of this note puzzling.
Less puzzling is Shipman's rather strange suggestion to Mrs Higgins that her mother was not entirely well and an eye should be kept on her, but that there was no need to go round straight away. This, when considered in conjunction with the contents of Form B, is highly suspicious. Where Shipman has killed, he frequently sought to increase the time interval between his visit and the time of discovery of the death, so that he could estimate the time of death at a significant period after his visit. Here, he suggests that the death occurred at 5.30pm and claims that he had seen Mrs Kennedy alive three hours earlier. He was suggesting that his visit took place at about 2.30pm. He might well have been seen arriving or leaving the premises and it would be dangerous to be too inaccurate on Form B about the time of his visit. If he had killed Mrs Kennedy at some time around 3pm, shortly before he telephoned Mrs Higgins, he would not wish the body to be found too quickly as someone might notice that the death had been discovered only just after his departure. I suspect that that is why he made the rather strange telephone call to Mrs Higgins, in which he suggested that there was no need for her to hurry round. In the event, she went to her mother's home at about 5.15pm and Shipman did not attend until 6.30pm. He took advantage of the delay by suggesting a time of death which was a little later than the time of discovery of the body. In that way he made it look as though the death had occurred well after his departure.
Shipman certified old age as the cause of death, although Mrs Higgins' evidence is that her mother was well that day and his own handwritten note suggests that he thought that Mrs Kennedy was sufficiently well that she did not need to be reviewed by him for three months. In my view, Shipman put old age on the MCCD because the medical history did not reveal any other plausible explanation for the death. He certified congestive heart failure as contributing to the death, even though there was no elevation in the jugular venous pressure when he saw her that afternoon. He recorded an odd chest pain radiating to the left side. It seems there that he might have had in mind a possible heart attack, but he did not include any reference to that possibility on the MCCD. The inclusion of congestive heart failure on the MCCD simply does not make sense and gives me the impression that either Shipman could not, or could not be bothered to, think of anything plausible to put on the certificate.
On the basis of his own notes, this was a sudden death of which the cause was unknown. Shipman should not have signed the MCCD and the case should have been referred to the coroner. I have accepted that it is theoretically possible that Mrs Kennedy died a sudden and natural death that afternoon. But if she did and if Shipman was not involved, it is hard to see why he did not refer the case to the coroner.
These factors all point to the conclusion that Shipman called at Mrs Kennedy's house on the afternoon of 9th
January 1995 and administered a lethal injection of diamorphine. I believe that he decided to go to her flat with the express purpose of killing her. The documents reveal no request for a visit nor any legitimate reason why he would have wished to visit her. Indeed, on looking back to the previous visit on 8th
November 1994, which appears in the record as a wholly improbable discussion about rehousing, I feel bound to suspect that he may well have intended to kill her on that occasion but for some reason his plan was foiled. In any event, I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Kennedy.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001