The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
James Joseph King
Introduction
Mr James Joseph King died at his home, 32 Ogden Court, Hyde on Wednesday, 24th
December 1997 at the age of 83. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr King's death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
In August 1998, the police began to investigate all deaths certified by Shipman in the 12 months prior to the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy. Mr King's death was in that number. The police took statements from Mr James Joseph King (Mr King's son, of the same name), Mrs Margaret Elizabeth Griffiths and Mr James Alfred Griffiths (Mr King's daughter and son-in-law), Mr James David Griffiths (Mr King's grandson), Mrs Sandra Christine Simpson (the resident manager at Ogden Court), Mr Keith Chorlton (an ambulance technician) and Mr Neil David Harrop (a paramedic). The police also obtained a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr King but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has obtained further statements from Mr James King junior and Mrs Griffiths. The Inquiry has also obtained a statement from Mr Jeffrey Francis Dudley (Mr King's nephew) and has had access to Mr King's general practitioner, hospital and ambulance records, to telephone billing records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr King was a widower, and lived alone in warden-controlled accommodation. According to the family, Mr King was a healthy man who enjoyed walking. According to his son, he walked ten miles only two days before his death. Mrs Griffiths remembers that her father used to take medication, which he said was for high blood pressure, and saw Shipman every six months to have his blood pressure monitored. She recalls her father saying that a doctor in a hospital had told him that his medication was only a diuretic. As far as the family was aware, Mr King did not suffer from any heart problems.
Dr Grenville has examined Mr King's general practitioner records. These show that Mr King was a relatively fit and healthy man who was diagnosed as having high blood pressure in 1984. This was treated successfully and his blood pressure readings for the last three years of his life were normal. An electrocardiogram (ECG) was performed on 14th
August 1984. Dr Grenville says that the tracing shows left ventricular hypertrophy, a sign that blood pressure had been sufficiently raised for a sufficient length of time to cause damage to the heart. These findings led Dr Grenville to the conclusion that Mr King was at a higher risk than normal of suffering a heart attack or a stroke, although this risk may well have reduced over the years because Mr King's blood pressure was well controlled.
Dr Grenville did not have the opportunity of reviewing the hospital records, which were obtained later by the Inquiry. They contain two further ECG traces, dated 9th
January 1991 and 12th
December 1995. The former was performed in the context of an orthopaedic admission to Tameside General Hospital and the latter in the context of surgery for prostate cancer, from which Mr King made a good recovery. These two traces have been considered by the medical advisor to the Inquiry who says they are normal and show no sign of left ventricular hypertrophy.
Mrs Griffiths saw her father on the day before his death. She recalls that she had been shopping and, as usual, he insisted on carrying her shopping bags. On the way back from shopping, Mr King said that he was feeling dizzy. He also mentioned that he had felt slightly dizzy the previous day. When they reached Mrs Griffiths' house, Mr King fell asleep in a chair. According to Mrs Griffiths' statement to the Inquiry, this was a regular occurrence with her father. Later that day, Mr King was able to walk back to his own home.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Simpson visited Mr King on the morning of 24th
December. He said that he was feeling 'woozy' by which she understood him to mean that he was experiencing dizzy spells. He said he had asked the doctor to visit. This was very unusual for him.
Within Mr King's medical records was a visit request slip, dated 24th
December 1997. The slip indicates that Mr King telephoned the surgery at 9am and contains the following message, which is replicated in the visits book for that day:
'cant stand up, very dizzy, light headed.
no pain anywhere, being sick'
.
Later that morning, Mrs Griffiths was in Hyde market when she saw her son, Mr James David Griffiths. He said that he had just been to see his grandfather who had told him that he was expecting the doctor. Mrs Griffiths therefore decided to call in on her father and arrived at his house at about midday. Her father answered the door and said, 'I thought you were Shipman'. Mrs Griffiths told the police that her father was barely able to walk because he was so unsteady. He had to steady himself by putting his hands against the wall of the hallway. Mr King said that he was sick of feeling dizzy and that he could not stand up. Mrs Griffiths has told the Inquiry that in other respects he seemed well. His face was not pale or flushed. His speech was normal. His only complaint was of feeling dizzy.
Mrs Griffiths left her father's house at about 1pm. He told her that he would telephone her when Shipman arrived. Mrs Griffiths' journey home took her about ten minutes. She telephoned her father at 1.20pm. She let the telephone ring three times and then hung up. It is not clear why she only let the telephone ring three times. She telephoned again at about 2pm but, this time, she let the telephone ring for a longer period. There was no answer and Mrs Griffiths began to feel that something was wrong. She telephoned at 3pm and still there was no answer. By this stage, she was very concerned and, together with her husband, drove to her father's house.
Mrs Griffiths let herself in by the front door of her father's house, with her spare key. It had been locked on the Yale lock. She found her father sitting in a chair. His hand was at the top of his chest near his collar. His mouth was open and his head was to one side. She touched him on his neck and it was still warm. The skin on the top of his head was white in colour and from his eyes downward he was still pink. He had his sleeves rolled up, although this was not unusual. He was sitting in his usual armchair. He looked as though he had simply gone to sleep. His collar was open and his tie was neatly rolled up, either on the chair next to him or in his hand. Mrs Griffiths told the Inquiry that she said to her husband, 'I wonder if he's given him an injection'. She did look for signs of an injection but could not see anything. An ambulance was called. The ambulance log reveals that the service was contacted at 3.07pm and that the ambulance arrived at 3.10pm. The paramedics confirmed death and contacted Shipman, before departing at 3.31pm. Shipman rang the house and said to Mrs Griffiths that he had 'just been up'.
Mrs Griffiths recalls that Shipman arrived at about 4pm. She does not think he touched her father, although he might have raised his eyelids. Mrs Griffiths asked Shipman about the cause of her father's death. Shipman hesitated and then said that he could put 'old age' if that was what Mrs Griffiths wanted. He then asked her what she would like him to put. She told him that she wanted a proper cause of death. At this stage her husband enquired about the possibility of a post-mortem examination. Mrs Griffiths said she would not wish that to happen and Shipman said there would be no need, as he had seen Mr King. Mr Griffiths asked Shipman whether he could have given Mr King anything, to which Shipman replied, 'Well, what could I have given him? He's already on tablets for blood pressure'. Shipman then said something about balance tests and Mr King walking with his hand on his nose. He also referred to hardening of the arteries and said that this happened to old people. He said, 'No one can tell how hard they are and when the blood goes into the heart it's squeezed through a narrow gap. The blood will go through in such a rush that the heart cannot cope'. Shipman explained that this was a cerebrovascular accident and he would put this on the death certificate.
Shipman's computerised note for 24th
December 1997 reads as follows:
'H/O: TIA
140/80 hs I II no obvious cva advice going to daughters'
.
There is then a second note for the same date, which reads:
'O/E - dead
1430 daughter cva hypertension'
.
There is no corresponding entry in the handwritten medical records.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), saying that he had last seen Mr King alive on the day of his death, 24th
December 1997. He said that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension of 12 years' duration.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that death had occurred at 2pm on 24th
December 1997. He said that he had attended Mr King during his last illness for a period of 24 hours. He said that he last saw Mr King alive about three hours before his death and made a complete external examination of the body about four hours after death. Shipman said that the mode of death was syncope of only minutes' duration. When asked how far his answers to the questions about the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others, Shipman wrote:
'Daughter Mrs Griffiths'
. Shipman stated that Mr King's daughter had nursed him during his last illness. He stated that Mrs Griffiths was present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville interpreted Shipman's first note of 24th
December to mean that Shipman had recorded a given history of transient ischaemic attack (TIA), that the blood pressure was 140/80, that the heart sounds were normal and that there was no obvious cerebrovascular accident. In Dr Grenville's view, Shipman's note is entirely inadequate because there is no record of any history from which Shipman could have diagnosed a TIA. Dr Grenville said that Mr King's dizziness might represent a cerebrovascular event but that would not be the most likely cause. In Dr Grenville's view, the most likely cause of the symptoms described was vestibulitis, an acute disorder of the organs of balance in the inner ear, usually treated with medication. Dr Grenville comments that the use of the term 'TIA' suggests that a history was given of a neurological disturbance lasting less than 24 hours and which had completely settled by the time Shipman saw Mr King. Even if the dizziness was due to a neurological disturbance, it is unlikely that it would have resolved to the extent that Mr King would have described it as completely settled if, as observed by his daughter, he was so dizzy that he had needed support when walking less than an hour previously. In Dr Grenville's view, Shipman has not described a TIA. As he stated that there were no signs of a cerebrovascular accident at the time of his visit, there was no justification for his certification of cerebrovascular accident as the cause of death when called back about two hours later. The death should have been regarded as sudden and unexpected and should have been referred to the coroner.
Professor Richard Baker studied Mr King's medical records and the cremation certificate and considered that the death of Mr King was highly suspicious on both accounts.
Conclusion
There are a number of suspicious features surrounding this death.
First and most obviously, the death was discovered very shortly after a visit by Shipman. Mr King was dizzy but otherwise well when his daughter left him at about 1pm. At that time Shipman had not yet visited. We know that he did visit. No one saw Mr King alive or spoke to him after Shipman's visit. It is highly likely that he was already dead when Mrs Griffiths tried to telephone him at about 2pm. Thus there is a very close temporal association between the death and Shipman's visit.
The witness evidence indicates that, on the day of his death, Mr King was experiencing dizziness and was finding it difficult to walk. In Dr Grenville's view, the most likely cause of Mr King's complaint was vestibulitis. This is not a condition likely to lead to a sudden death.
Shipman's note of his visit does not make medical sense. He suggests that there is a history of a TIA but records no signs or symptoms on which that diagnosis could be based. He does not record any current symptoms or complaints, despite the fact that less than an hour earlier Mr King was unable to walk unsupported. This note does not provide credible support for the certified cause of death.
Shipman told a number of lies on Form B. He said that he had attended Mr King during his last illness for a period of 24 hours. That was untrue. He did not attend him until shortly before his death. Shipman said that death occurred at 2pm. That might well be true. However, Shipman claimed that he had last seen Mr King about three hours before the death. That was certainly a lie, as Shipman had not visited when Mrs Griffiths left at about 1pm. In my view, that lie was designed to create the impression that a substantial interval had elapsed between the visit and the death. It is almost certainly untrue that Shipman made a complete external examination of the body. However, I attach little significance to that as Shipman rarely seems to have examined any body properly and, in any event, the paramedics had already confirmed that Mr King was dead. Shipman's assertion that Mrs Griffiths nursed her father in his last illness is clearly false and was designed to give the impression that the death was not unexpected. Shipman's assertion that Mrs Griffiths was present at the death is also quite false and he must have known it. This lie was, in my view, designed to create the impression that the death was not unexpected and did not occur while Shipman was alone with the patient. Mrs Griffiths could not have given Shipman any information from which he could have inferred the mode or duration of Mr King's death. Form B is a pack of lies designed to create the impression of a natural death.
As Dr Grenville has explained, if this death was natural, Shipman could not possibly have known its cause. He virtually admitted to Mrs Griffiths that he did not know what to put on the MCCD, as a natural cause. He should have referred the death to the coroner.
Mr King's appearance in death was entirely consistent with the appearance of many of Shipman's victims who died by lethal injection of diamorphine and was not typical of death by cerebrovascular accident.
Taking all these factors together, I am quite sure that Shipman killed Mr King. I have no doubt that Mr King was still feeling dizzy when Shipman arrived and that Shipman said he would give him an injection for the relief of those symptoms. That injection must have been a lethal dose of opiate, almost certainly diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001