The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The First Report
>
Alphabetical List of Cases
>
Moira Kelly
Introduction
Miss Moira Kelly died at the Fielden Hospital, Todmorden on Monday, 16th
December 1974 at the age of 26. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia.
Miss Kelly's death was one of the 22 deaths for which the cause was certified by Shipman during his time in Todmorden. Following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's clinical audit in January 2001, the police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Vera Kelly (Miss Kelly's mother) and Mrs Christine Mylan (a former nurse at the Fielden Hospital). An inquest into Miss Kelly's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The general practitioner notes have not survived. The Inquiry has had access to Miss Kelly's hospital notes.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
According to her mother, Miss Kelly appeared to develop normally until the age of nine months, when she developed a lump on her leg. An injection was given in an attempt to treat this but it appeared to lead to complications and, in due course, it became clear that Miss Kelly had grave physical handicaps and severe learning difficulties. She also suffered fits. She needed constant care. She remained at home until the age of 12 when she was admitted to the Fielden Hospital in Todmorden. She was cared for on the Cherry Ward, which specialised in the care of children and young people.
The patients at the Fielden Hospital came under the care of the general practitioners from the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre where Shipman worked between March 1974 and September 1975.
The Death
Mrs Mylan was a nurse on the ward at the time of Miss Kelly's death and was promoted to the position of ward sister of Cherry Ward in 1978. At the time of compiling her police statement, Mrs Mylan had available to her the Fielden Hospital nursing notes. Mrs Mylan clearly remembers Miss Kelly, and the notes refreshed her memory as to the details of Miss Kelly's condition and the circumstances of her death.
The notes record that Miss Kelly suffered from microcephaly, cerebral palsy and spastic quadriplegia. She suffered from grand mal epileptic fits with increasing frequency towards the end of her life. In late November 1974, she developed a cold and chest infection. Dr John Dacre visited and prescribed penicillin. She appeared to recover from the chest infection and, on 25th
November, Shipman ordered that the penicillin treatment be discontinued. There is no record that Shipman visited after that date. Mrs Mylan says that doctors' visits were always recorded in the notes.
Miss Kelly then appeared to be stable until the morning of 14th
December, when she suffered six grand mal attacks. During the afternoon, she was noted to be lethargic and chesty and, the following day, Dr Grieve diagnosed bronchopneumonia and prescribed penicillin. Her condition was obviously grave. The notes record that Miss Kelly's relatives were informed of her condition, which is an indication of the severity of her symptoms. It is recorded that her mother attended during the afternoon of 15th
December. Miss Kelly's condition continued to decline during that day and she died at 7.10am the following day.
Although the notes do not record the fact, it appears that it was probably Shipman who came out to examine the body and confirm the death. He certainly completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death. Although this document has not survived, the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') shows that he certified the cause of death as bronchopneumonia.
Conclusion
I am quite sure that Miss Kelly died as the result of natural causes. There is no evidence whatsoever to suggest that Shipman was in any way involved in her death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001