The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ellen Kelly
Introduction
Mrs Ellen Kelly died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Saturday, 9th
December 1978 at the age of 82. She had been a temporary resident there for a period of two weeks. She was registered with a doctor in Ashton but it seems likely that she was registered as a temporary patient of Shipman during her short stay at Charnley House. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's conviction for murder, Mrs Kelly's daughter, Mrs Mary Hardy, contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances of her mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Miss Patricia Walker (Mrs Kelly's granddaughter) and Mrs Lilian Stansfield (the former matron at Charnley House). An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Miss Walker, Mrs Kathleen Walker (Mrs Kelly's other daughter), Mrs Hardy and Mrs Stansfield. The Inquiry has also had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the Charnley House daily diary for 1978. Mrs Kelly's medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
It appears that Mrs Kelly had enjoyed good health for most of her life. She had no history of suffering a stroke or heart attack or having high blood pressure. In December 1974, she fractured her hip in a fall, which left her with restricted mobility. From that time, she walked with the aid of a Zimmer frame. She lived with Mrs Hardy and her husband, Mr Eric Hardy, behind the shop that was their family business. She needed help with personal care. Mrs Hardy helped her to get up, wash and dress each morning.
On 24th
November 1978, Mrs Hardy injured her leg and was admitted to Tameside General Hospital. Mrs Kelly had to be cared for and on 25th
November she was admitted to Charnley House for temporary respite care pending Mrs Hardy's recovery. Her family visited her at Charnley House regularly. Miss Patricia Walker visited her each day. Mrs Kelly did not enjoy being at Charnley House and was keen to return home. Mrs Stansfield confirms this. She also recalls that Mrs Kelly was very confused. However, members of the family say that Mrs Kelly was still mentally alert, although she was rather deaf.
A note in the daily diary for 1st
December 1978 records that Mrs Kelly was complaining of pain in her back. On the following day, she was noted to be chesty and in the night report it was suggested that a doctor should see her. On Sunday, 3rd
December, it was noted that a doctor had been consulted about Mrs Kelly's condition and had suggested that she be given penicillin tablets and Benylin. The doctor is not identified in the record and it does not appear that the doctor actually saw Mrs Kelly. At this time, it appears that Mrs Kelly was still eating well. Miss Walker remembers that Mrs Lanceley (the proprietor of Charnley House) told her that Mrs Kelly had developed a bad cough and that she had been given Benylin. She does not remember Mrs Lanceley mentioning a doctor.
During the next few days, there are no further references in the daily diary to Mrs Kelly's health. It was recorded that she did not eat her breakfast on the morning of Tuesday, 5th
or Thursday, 7th
December.
Miss Walker last saw her grandmother for about an hour on the afternoon of Friday, 8th
December. She remembers that she was sitting in the residents' lounge and appeared comfortable and well. She was cheerful and looking forward to returning home the following day. The Charnley House diary for that day makes no mention of Mrs Kelly's state of health but states where her clothes were to be found. She had a disturbed night and kept the other ladies in her room awake.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Stansfield remembers that Mrs Kelly was due to be collected by her family at about midday on 9th
December 1978. She was very excited about the prospect of returning home. Mrs Lanceley wrote in the diary:
'Please will you have all Mrs Kelly's
belongings packed her daughter will call
for her after 1.0pm. She is taking her home.
Mrs Kelly's granddaughter has taken her
bag home, just left her comb'
.
According to Mrs Stansfield, Mrs Kelly waited to be collected in the communal lounge area at Charnley House. At one stage Mrs Stansfield joked with her that she would be home in time for her midday meal. At about 11am, however, she observed that Mrs Kelly was slumped in her chair. She and Mrs Lanceley moved her into her bedroom. Mrs Stansfield thought that Mrs Kelly had had a heart attack and that she was dying. When she lay Mrs Kelly on her bed, she thought that she was dead but was not sure. She telephoned Shipman's surgery and asked that he attend immediately. She cannot remember Shipman's arrival or anything else about that morning. She thinks that Shipman attended only after Mrs Kelly had died. She says that she found the death quite sudden and unexpected.
In her statement to the police, Mrs Stansfield said that Mrs Kelly had been poorly during her stay. Immediately after her own mid-morning break on 9th
December, she noticed Mrs Kelly in the chair. She was still breathing but was clearly very poorly. With the help of Mrs Lanceley, she transferred Mrs Kelly into a wheelchair and then onto her bed. She said that she thought that Mrs Kelly died as she was being put onto the bed. Mrs Stansfield said that she could not remember what happened after that but says that she 'would have' contacted the doctor and the family, which suggests that, at the time she made her police statement, she had no actual recollection of doing so.
Mrs Kathleen Walker remembers receiving a telephone call from Charnley House that morning to inform her that Mrs Kelly had been taken ill. When she said that Mrs Kelly was supposed to be coming home that day, the caller replied, 'She won't be coming home today, get here as quick as you can'. Before she had time to arrange travel to Charnley House, Mrs Walker received a second call to say that Mrs Kelly had died. She then telephoned her sister, Mrs Hardy, as well as Mrs Kelly's priest, who came to her house immediately and then went to Charnley House.
Mrs Hardy thinks that her sister telephoned her at about 10am with the news that Mrs Kelly was unwell. This was followed by a second call informing her that her mother had died. Miss Patricia Walker remembers returning home from a shopping trip at about 11am and learning that Mrs Kelly had died.
Mrs Stansfield made the following note in the Charnley House diary:
'Mrs Kelly, passed away 11.15 A.M. Dr Shipman saw her, C.T.
relatives informed, Priest came to see her 12 - A.M.
Daughter came, collected all her clothes etc. said that a Mr Murray
Would come for her later.
(undertaker)'
.
Mrs Stansfield has interpreted the entry to mean that both Shipman and the priest saw Mrs Kelly only after she had died.
The Aftermath
Mrs Walker, her daughter and Mr Eric Hardy went to Shipman's surgery on Monday, 11th
December 1978 to collect the MCCD. Mrs Walker asked what had happened and Shipman told her that Mrs Kelly had suffered a coronary thrombosis. Miss Walker asked Shipman if Mrs Kelly had been aware of what was happening to her and whether she had suffered. Shipman replied that Mrs Kelly had not been in pain but she just 'went like that'. Mrs Walker said that she wanted a post-mortem examination, as the death was so sudden. Shipman said that he did not think that was necessary. He suggested that Mrs Kelly had 'suffered enough' and should be left in peace. Although the family was not happy with this decision, it was accepted.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman certified that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis. He said that he had last seen Mrs Kelly alive on the day of her death. He said that he had seen the body after death and that a post-mortem examination would not be held. Mrs Stansfield has seen this document and says that she is puzzled by Shipman's claim that he saw Mrs Kelly alive on 9th
December. It was her recollection that he arrived after the death.
Conclusion
It appears from the witness evidence that Mrs Kelly had enjoyed good health until shortly before her death. It seems that she had become immobile and unable to look after herself. There does not seem to have been any medical history which would increase Mrs Kelly's risk of suffering a heart attack. However, this cannot be checked from her medical records. In any event, a woman of 82 is at some risk of sudden death from a heart attack even without any previous history or warning signs.
On the morning of 9th
December, the evidence strongly suggests that Mrs Kelly suddenly became ill while waiting for her family to collect her from Charnley House. It seems quite likely that this sudden deterioration was due to a heart attack, although other explanations are quite possible. Mrs Stansfield realised that the situation was serious and believes that Mrs Kelly died as she was being put to bed. It appears that someone immediately telephoned the family and Shipman. There is no witness who remembers seeing Shipman at the home that morning. Mrs Stansfield believes that Shipman was not even summoned until after Mrs Kelly had died and she does not think that he saw her alive.
There is no clear evidence to suggest that Shipman saw Mrs Kelly alive. If he did, she must have been on the verge of death. The possibility that Shipman visited Charnley House and was responsible for the sudden deterioration which occurred while she was sitting in the lounge should be raised only so that it might be dismissed. Mrs Kelly was not Shipman's patient and he was not due to see her or any other resident that morning. It is implausible to suggest that he might have entered the house and, without reference to the staff on duty, given Mrs Kelly an injection while she was sitting in a room to which many other people had access.
Most of the evidence suggests that Mrs Kelly died a natural death. However, I am puzzled by Shipman's claim that he saw her before she died. I think the probable explanation for this is that Shipman wanted to complete the MCCD himself and did not want to refer the case to the coroner. He would not be qualified to sign the MCCD unless he had attended Mrs Kelly during her last illness. In fact it seems highly likely that he had not attended Mrs Kelly during her last illness (which had only lasted a few minutes) and was almost certainly not qualified to complete the MCCD. He should have referred the case to the coroner. It may be that he pretended to have seen Mrs Kelly alive so that he could claim to be qualified to sign the MCCD. Why he did not want to refer the case to the coroner I cannot say. In cases where I suspect that he has killed the patient, I can see why he would not wish to have the coroner involved. Where there is no real suspicion that he has killed the patient, it is hard to see why he should wish to avoid this. In some cases, I think perhaps he wanted to save the family the distress and delay which referral can cause. Here, the family wanted a post-mortem examination. It may be that Shipman simply could not be bothered to refer the case.
This aspect of the case makes me hold back from saying that I am sure that Mrs Kelly died a natural death. I think she probably did, as all the remaining evidence suggests that her death was sudden but natural. The circumstances at Charnley House were such as to make it highly unlikely that Shipman could have done anything to Mrs Kelly to cause her sudden collapse and death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001