The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Keating
Introduction
Miss Mary Keating died at The Sycamores, a residential home for the elderly, Victoria Street, Hyde on Tuesday, 28th
April 1998 at the age of 95. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
In August 1998, the Greater Manchester Police recovered the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Miss Keating and, after a preliminary assessment, decided to investigate her death. They took statements from Miss Keating's sister, Mrs Anna Liggins, and Dr Alan Banks. Detective Sergeant John Ashley provided a statement dealing with an audit trail of Shipman's computer. An inquest into Miss Keating's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Patricia Marro, Mrs Joan Williams, Mrs Ellen Ashton, Mrs Marion Rowbotham, Mrs Joan Farnan, Mrs Nora Smyth, Mrs Patricia O'Connell and Mrs Sharon Fruhwirth, all of whom worked as care assistants at The Sycamores, and from Mrs Marjorie Bradbury, the manager at the home, and Mrs Patricia McDiarmid, the deputy manager at the home. The Inquiry has also had access to Miss Keating's general practitioner and hospital records and to the visits books and appointments sheets for the relevant period, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and notes and records from The Sycamores.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
It is not clear for how long Miss Keating had been a resident at The Sycamores but correspondence from Tameside General Hospital found in her medical records suggests that she had been there for about eight years. In 1992, she suffered a stroke, following which her speech and mobility were affected. Her medical records reveal that Shipman had diagnosed congestive heart failure for which he had prescribed enalapril.
In February 1998, Miss Keating had a chest infection and was prescribed an antibiotic. The notes from The Sycamores reveal that, during March 1998, she developed gastroenteritis and lost her appetite. She began to spend a lot of time in bed and later in the month she developed pressure sores. The district nurses attended to dress these areas. Miss Keating continued to have bowel trouble and was prescribed Imodium on 17th
April. It is not clear whether or not Shipman visited on that day.
During the night of 21st
April, the night staff summoned a doctor because they noticed a painful bruise on Miss Keating's arm. Shipman visited the following day, 22nd
April, and decided to arrange a domiciliary visit by a consultant physician. That visit is noted in The Sycamores nursing notes, the medical records and Shipman's visits book. The following day, Miss Keating was very
'low'
and her family was advised that the consultant was to visit. Dr Wan came later in the day and offered to take Miss Keating into hospital. After discussion with the family, it was decided that she should stay at The Sycamores. Dr Wan said that Miss Keating had a chest infection and was very weak. She was to continue with her medication, should be encouraged to take fluids and was to be turned regularly. Her family stayed until 8.45pm. A priest visited that day and arranged to come again the following day.
Miss Keating's condition continued to deteriorate. She was given 'all care and attention' by the staff and by the district nurses. Her family repeatedly telephoned to enquire after her and the priest visited at least twice.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Farnan came on duty at 9pm or 10pm on 27th
April 1998. She checked Miss Keating's condition periodically and, soon after 1am, she found that Miss Keating had died. Shipman had not visited Miss Keating during Mrs Farnan's shift. Mrs Farnan reported the death to her senior officer. A deputising doctor attended the home at 2.15am and pronounced Miss Keating dead.
The following entry appears in The Sycamores notes for 28th
April 1998, relating to Miss Keating:
'passed away peacefully at 1.20am
G.P. informed, family informed by night staff
Funeral directors F Massey & Sons arrived at 10.30'
.
This entry was made by Mrs Fruhwirth shortly after she came on duty at 8am. She says that Shipman came to examine the body but she was unable to find the key to Miss Keating's room and was unable to let him in. He told her that this would not matter as he could certify the death as due to old age.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD on 28th
April. He certified that the death had been due to old age and that congestive heart failure had contributed to it. He said that he had last seen Miss Keating alive on 22nd
April, which is consistent with The Sycamores notes and the medical records. He said that he had seen the body after death, which may or may not have been true. He said that there would not be a post-mortem examination.
Miss Keating was buried in Hyde Cemetery so there are no cremation documents.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered Miss Keating's medical records and considered the death to be moderately suspicious. He did not have access to the records from The Sycamores.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that this was a natural death.
Miss Keating's gradual decline is well documented in The Sycamores nursing records. It is clear from the note of Dr Wan's visit that he recognised that she was very unwell and it appears that he discussed with her family whether it would be in her best interests to be taken into hospital or to stay at the home. It must have been recognised by all that Miss Keating had not long to live. Her death on 28th
April was neither sudden nor unexpected.
There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman saw Miss Keating alive after 22nd
April. All the documents confirm a visit on that day and none suggests any later visit. I do not think there is any reason to suspect that Shipman had access to Miss Keating in the period before her death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001