The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Elsie King
Introduction
Mrs Elsie King died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Sunday, 29th
July 1979 at the age of 84. She had been a patient of Shipman since she moved to Charnley House on 29th
December 1978. He certified that the cause of her death was senility.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed advertisements in a number of newspapers, publishing a list of cases in which the Inquiry had only limited information as to the circumstances of the death and in which no relatives had been traced. In response to that advertisement, the Inquiry was contacted by Mrs King's son, Mr Derek King.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr King. The Inquiry has also had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs King, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, Shipman's visits book for 1979 and the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs King began to suffer from senile dementia some years before her death. According to her son, Mrs King settled well at Charnley House. Although she had previously been with a different general practitioner in Denton, Mrs King registered with Shipman when she moved to Charnley House. According to her son, the staff at the home told him that his mother would be registered with 'the GP for Charnley House' and he had no objection to that course.
The Events of the Weeks Leading up to Death
On Saturday, 28th
April 1979, the Charnley House daily diary records that Shipman came to see Mrs King because she was unwell. He directed that she was to be given no medication at all. It is possible that he was concerned that she was suffering side effects from Largactil, a sedative or anti-psychotic drug, which she had been taking. On 16th
May, Shipman directed that she should resume taking Largactil.
On Thursday, 5th
July, Shipman was called to the home to see Mrs King, who had fallen. Shipman thought she had suffered a fracture of the fibula. Mrs King was sent to hospital but returned at 5pm with a report that nothing was broken. That night, she was very disturbed and was given an extra dose of Largactil. The following morning, 6th
July, Shipman was sent for again as it was thought that Mrs King had fallen again in the night, although the night staff said that she had not. She had facial bruising and her nose was blocked with blood. Her top lip and right knee were said to be very sore. The diary records show that Shipman left a prescription, which was collected. The note does not say what the medication was, only that it was to be kept locked up. I infer from that that it was probably a controlled drug of some sort. Mrs King had another disturbed night.
On 9th
July, Shipman called to see Mrs King although there is no note of any treatment ordered. He visited again on 13th
July, took her off her new tablets and put her back on Largactil. That evening she was described as being 'not well, shivering and very jumpy'. The next day, she stayed in bed. It is not clear whether or not Mrs King was largely confined to bed from this time. However, there is no note expressing concern about her physical condition until Friday, 20th
July, when she and several others in the home apparently had chest complaints. Shipman certainly visited the home that day although it is not entirely clear whether or not he saw Mrs King. She and others were to be given Benylin. On the weekend of 21st
/22nd
July, Mrs King was troubled by a sore back and, judging from the entry for the following Monday, it seems likely that this was a bedsore.
Shipman wrote on the MCCD counterfoil that he saw Mrs King on Wednesday, 25th
July, but there is no entry to this effect either in the Charnley House diary or in Shipman's visits book. On Thursday, 26th
July, Mrs King was described in the diary as remaining very poorly and her back was still sore.
On Friday, 27th
July, it is recorded that Mrs King was vomiting in the evening.
Although Mr King remembers that he saw his mother about two days before her death, and that her condition was no different from usual, it is possible that he is mistaken and that he is recalling her condition at an earlier time.
The Day of the Death
On Saturday, 28th
July 1979, Mrs King's back was still very sore and a new dressing was applied. She was said to be poorly that evening and was given
'all attention'
. She deteriorated during the night and died at 3.35am in the early hours of Sunday, 29th July 1979.
The diary entry relating to her death was made as part of the night report. The morning report says that Dr Bill Bennett certified her death and that her body was removed from the premises at noon. As it was Shipman who certified the cause of Mrs King's death, Dr Bennett must only have certified the fact of death.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD counterfoil on 30th
July 1979. He said that Mrs King had died on 29th
July and that he had last seen her alive on 25th
July, which was probably incorrect. As it so happens, he seems to have seen someone with the same initial and surname as Mrs King on July 26th
but that person did not live at Charnley House. Shipman said that there was to be no post-mortem examination. He circled the letter
'a'
in response to the question as to whether he had seen the body after death but he then wrote the words
'Dr Bennett'
; and so whilst his selection of the letter
'a'
would suggest that Shipman himself had seen the body after death, the fact that he wrote Dr Bennett's name would suggest that it was in fact Dr Bennett who did so, and this accords with the Charnley House daily diary.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs King's death was natural.
First, the Charnley House daily diary records a gradual deterioration. Her death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
Second, there is no evidence that Shipman saw Mrs King for several days before her death. From the daily diary it would seem that the last time he could have seen her was on 20th
July. The visits book confirms a visit to Charnley House on that day but not to see Mrs King. That Shipman inaccurately claimed that he had last seen Mrs King alive on 25th
July, does not of itself give rise to suspicion that he was involved in her death. He was very careless in the way in which he completed death and cremation certificates and often made mistakes. Sometimes he made deliberately false claims that he had seen a patient within 14 days before the death in cases where he had not killed the patient. He might have done that on this occasion. It is quite possible that he had not seen Mrs King since 13th
July, which would be more than 14 days before the death. Shipman was always anxious to say that he had seen the patient within 14 days of the death, even in cases where it was not necessary for him to make that claim in order to qualify him to certify the cause of death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001