The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Frederick King
Introduction
Mr Frederick King died on Ward 2, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Monday, 3rd
July 1972 at the age of 58. He had been admitted about five days earlier. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was haemorrhagic pneumonia of the right lung. At the time of Mr King’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer (SHO) in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from one of Mr King’s three sons, Mr Howard King. His older brother, Dr Roy King, has seen and agrees with the contents of Mr Howard King’s statement. Their mother is now quite elderly and was not contacted at her son’s request. A statement was also taken from Mrs Anne Calverley (formerly Miss Anne Paley), who was the senior nursing sister on Ward 2 at the time of the death. Mr King’s hospital records are no longer available. Mr King’s body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. A post-mortem examination was performed. The post-mortem examination report is no longer available although the PGI mortuary post-mortem book, which contains brief details of each post-mortem examination performed there, was made available to the Inquiry.
Mr Howard King has always been concerned about his father’s death, because he died shortly after members of the family had been reassured by the nursing staff that it was all right for them to leave the hospital and go home. He is now particularly concerned having seen that information contained in cremation Form B is inconsistent with his recollection.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers.
Personal Background
Before 1972, Mr King was a fit and active married man who generally enjoyed good health. About four months before he died, however, he attended his general practitioner (GP) because he was concerned about a lump that had developed on his neck. The GP diagnosed a cyst and nothing further was done about it at that time. Over the next two months, Mr King became very tired and lethargic. Eventually, he had to stop work. Mr Howard King’s wife (who was then his girlfriend) recalls seeing Mr King in town. He looked very ill and seemed to be struggling. He asked her to take his sick note to his employers. The sick note said that he was suffering from
‘debility’
.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
Mr Howard King is unsure of the exact circumstances of his father’s admission to PGI but he believes there was concern that Mr King’s tiredness was related to the lump on his neck. It was thought that the lump might be a Hodgkin’s lymphoma, although this was never confirmed. Mr Howard King was away at college at the time but he recalls that he received a telephone call from his mother on the Wednesday or Thursday before his father died, to say that he had gone into hospital. Mr Howard King visited his father on the Friday, but cannot remember the details of this visit. He visited again on the Saturday (which was 1st
July) and recalls that his father was very poorly. At this time, Mrs King was staying at the hospital and someone told her that her husband had a severe chest infection. Mr King was in a side ward or cubicle. The practice at the time on Ward 2 was to move a patient from the main area of the ward to a cubicle when his/her condition had become very serious or when death was imminent. On the Sunday, Mr King was still poorly, but he roused himself now and again. His conversation was confused. Mr Howard King stayed for about an hour that day.
The Day of the Death
On Monday, 3rd
July, Mr Howard King went to the hospital at 11.30am. Dr Roy King, and their mother were already there. Their father was still in the side ward. He was sleeping peacefully. A nursing sister spoke to the family and told them that Mr King was responding to treatment and that arrangements had been made for a biopsy on the lump in his neck later in the week. The sister advised Mrs King to go home and get some sleep and to come to see her husband later that day. At about midday, Dr Roy King took his mother home. That was the first time she had left her husband since his admission. Mr Howard King visited his wife’s father, who was in another ward at the hospital, and then walked home, arriving at about 1pm.
Mr Howard King had not been at home very long when he received a telephone call from the hospital informing him that his father had died. He handed the receiver to his brother and ran the short distance to the hospital, where he arrived five to ten minutes later. He does not remember much of what happened when he arrived at the hospital. He recalls shouting at a member of staff, angry that the family had been told to go home and had not been present when his father died. He went to a garden next to the hospital and was not on the ward when Dr King and their mother arrived. He then went home alone and does not know how long his brother and mother remained at the hospital or if anything was said to them.
Post-Mortem Examination Report
The relevant entry in the PGI mortuary post-mortem book states:
‘PM72/245 4 KING Frederick, 58 TURNER PGI
Haemorhagic
(
sic
)
Pneumonia Right Lung ELS.’
This entry indicates that the post-mortem examination (PM72/245) took place on 4th
July, that Mr King was 58 years old when he died and that Dr John Turner (a consultant physician) had referred the body for post-mortem examination. The cause of death had been found to be haemorrhagic pneumonia of the right lung. The initials
‘ELS’
are those of the pathologist, the late Dr Simons.
Certification
Shipman completed cremation Form B on 4th
July 1972. It appears that he was already aware of the results of the post-mortem examination. He stated that the time of death was 2pm on 3rd
July 1972. He said that he had attended Mr King during his last illness for five days, which accords with the family’s recollection of the length of Mr King’s stay in hospital. Shipman also stated that he had last seen Mr King alive on the day of his death and that he saw the body one hour after death. The cause of death was stated in exactly the same terms as the pathologist’s opinion. Shipman said that the mode of death was a coma of two days’ duration. Mr Howard King does not agree with this; he says that, when he saw his father on the day of the death, his father had spoken to him; although he was sleeping when they arrived and was somewhat confused, he was not in a coma. On Form B, Shipman said that Sister Paley had nursed Mr King in his final illness. That was almost certainly true; she was the senior ward sister at the time. However, she does not remember Mr King. Shipman also stated that Mr King’s wife and son (he does not say which son) were present at the moment of Mr King’s death. As I have explained, Mr King’s recollection is in direct conflict with that assertion. In answer to the question whether further examination of the body was desirable, Shipman wrote that a post-mortem examination was to be carried out for the benefit of the hospital.
Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain completed cremation Form C. He recorded that he had seen and questioned Shipman and the nursing staff on Ward 2. He had not questioned any relatives of Mr King. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Dr Roy King registered the death on 5th
July. Mr Howard King was not satisfied with the death certificate, as it made no mention of Hodgkin’s lymphoma, the condition the family believed had led to Mr King’s hospital admission. He remains concerned about this.
Conclusion
Having considered the material before the Inquiry, I am satisfied that Mr King had generally enjoyed good health but that this changed in early 1972. It can never be known whether the lump that he developed in his neck was or was not connected with his later symptoms of extreme tiredness. However, the absence of any reference to the lump in the mortuary record of the post-mortem examination suggests that the lump was not considered to be germane to the cause of death.
The post-mortem record shows that Mr King had pneumonia. After Mr King was admitted to hospital, his wife was told that he had a severe chest infection. The two pieces of information are consistent. Mr King’s extreme tiredness in the period before his admission is also consistent with the development of a chest infection of increasing seriousness. The development of confusion in the last day or so before the death is also consistent with the diagnosis of pneumonia. It seems to me that the diagnosis of pneumonia is as clear as one could hope for in the absence of medical records. I think I can reassure the King family that Mr King’s underlying illness was pneumonia and was not connected with the lump in his neck. I am also of the view that Mr King could well have died of pneumonia without any intervention on the part of Shipman.
However, Mr Howard King remains concerned that Shipman might have played some part in causing his father’s death. That is certainly a possibility. Shipman was the SHO on the ward at the time and was involved in Mr King’s treatment. Mr Howard King is concerned about some of the entries on cremation Form B. Shipman stated that Mr King was in a coma for two days and Mr Howard King says that he was not. I understand Mr Howard King’s concern but do not think that this inconsistency suggests that Shipman did anything wrong. I think it entirely possible that Shipman used the expression ‘coma’ loosely, meaning only that Mr King’s level of consciousness was depressed, which it clearly was. Of potentially greater significance is Shipman’s assertion that Mr King’s wife and one of his sons were present at the death when they were not. That entry is puzzling. It may be that Shipman saw members of the family at the hospital and assumed that they had been present at the time of death. It is possible that Shipman deliberately lied when making that entry. I cannot say that he did but, if he did, then that would increase any suspicion about his involvement.
Perhaps the most troubling feature is that the family was advised to leave the hospital and that Mr King died very soon afterwards. I can understand why the family is concerned about that. However, there is no evidence that the advice to leave was given by Shipman or on his instructions. There is no reason to suspect that it was given in order to get the family out of the way. It might have been given because the nurse thought that Mrs King was looking tired (she had been at the hospital for about five days) and genuinely believed that there would be no change in Mr King’s condition for some time. It may have been pure mischance that Mr King died so soon after the family’s departure. That said, I cannot rule out the possibility that Shipman gave instructions intended to get the family out of the way and that he then gave Mr King something which hastened his death. If he did, I think the death was advanced by only a very short period. However, I stress that there is no evidence that Shipman played any sinister part in this death and my opinion is that the death was very probably natural.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001