The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ivy Lomas
Introduction
Mrs Ivy Lomas died on 29th
May 1997 at the age of 63. The death occurred in Shipman's surgery. He certified the death as being due to coronary thrombosis. Post-mortem examination, after exhumation of the body, showed a level of morphine in the tissues consistent with the administration of a fatal dose.
Personal Background
Mrs Lomas was not in good health just before her death. Her medical records show that she suffered from chronic obstructive airways disease and quite frequent upper and lower respiratory tract infections. She had been a heavy smoker and smoked 40 cigarettes per day. She could not walk far or lift anything heavy. She also suffered from depression and anxiety and was a very frequent visitor at Shipman's surgery. Her adult son suffered a psychiatric illness and this caused Mrs Lomas a great deal of worry. On account of her restricted tolerance of exercise, one of her neighbours took her dog for a walk each day.
The Circumstances of the Death
Two neighbours saw Mrs Lomas on the day of her death. To one, she mentioned that she had pains in her chest and arms. However, she was able to go out in the morning to make arrangements for the care of her son, who was ill. In the afternoon, she took a bus into Hyde in order to attend a 4pm appointment with Shipman. She arrived early and was seen to be looking a little pale. She walked into the consulting room unaided.
After a very short time, Shipman took Mrs Lomas from his consulting room to the treatment room. After about ten minutes, Shipman came to the reception area. According to the receptionist, he looked flushed and apologised for keeping his patients waiting. He said he had had a problem with the electrocardiograph (ECG) machine. He dealt with two or three more patients in his consulting room before returning to the treatment room. He then called the receptionist, Mrs Carol Chapman, into the treatment room and told her that he had tried to take an ECG reading on Mrs Lomas but could not get a trace. He said that he had first thought the machine was broken but then realised that Mrs Lomas had died. He said he had tried to resuscitate her but could not do so. He told Mrs Chapman to contact Mrs Lomas' son, Jack. He saw some more patients. Mrs Chapman could not contact Mr Lomas, so she rang the police.
When PC Reade attended, he was shown the fully clothed body of Mrs Lomas in the treatment room. Shipman told him that he would be able to certify death as due to natural causes. PC Reade was curious (although apparently not suspicious) and asked Shipman what had happened. Shipman said that Mrs Lomas had come in to consult him about bronchial problems. After treating her for that, he had shown her into the treatment room to rest. He had carried on seeing other patients. About 15 minutes later, he had gone back to Mrs Lomas and had found her dead. He did not mention an ECG to PC Reade. He said he had not tried resuscitation because Mrs Lomas had been quite beyond that. Nor had he called an ambulance. PC Reade claims that he was amazed. Shipman made a joke in very bad taste about Mrs Lomas having been so frequent a visitor to the surgery that he had thought of having a seat reserved for her, with a plaque.
Mrs Lomas' daughter, Mrs Carol Dalpiaz, saw Shipman that evening. He told her that Mrs Lomas had come into the surgery looking unwell. He said he had taken her to the treatment room, as he had to see another patient in his consulting room. He did not say that he had wanted to do an ECG. He said that, when he had seen the other patient, he went back to see Mrs Lomas and found her dead. She had gone blue round the mouth. She had had a massive heart attack and had died. He had tried to revive her but failed. He said nothing about a post-mortem examination.
The Defence Case
Shipman's account in evidence, which the jury must have rejected, was that, when she arrived for the consultation, Mrs Lomas said she had had chest pain for four hours that day. She looked sweaty and had an irregular pulse. He thought she might be having a coronary thrombosis. He decided to do an ECG so he took her to the treatment room. As she was getting onto the bed, she collapsed. He turned her onto her back and saw that she was unconscious. He tried resuscitation. He hit her hard twice on the chest. He put a tube down her throat to keep the tongue out of the way. He did external cardiac massage and mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. She did not respond. He checked her eyes and heart and found she was dead. He had not called for assistance, as he was skilled in first aid. He had not thought it appropriate to call for an ambulance with paramedics. He then went to see Mrs Chapman and told her he had a problem with the ECG machine and would see the next patient. He did not tell her Mrs Lomas was dead, as that would have meant taking her off her duties. So he saw three patients, then told Mrs Chapman of the death and asked her to contact Mr Lomas. He had certified the death as due to a coronary thrombosis.
The Medical Records
The medical records were voluminous but contained only one reference to heart disease. This was on the handwritten summary card; the last entry, dated 1991, said
'IHD'
, which means ischaemic heart disease. The computerised records contained no reference to heart disease of any kind and Mrs Lomas was not receiving any medication for a cardiac condition. The Crown suggested that the reference to ischaemic heart disease in the summary card was false and had been made in order to lend plausibility to Mrs Lomas' death supposedly from a heart attack.
Shipman's record of the final consultation said that Mrs Lomas had been suffering from pain in the centre of the chest radiating to the arms for four to five hours that day. It was now continuous and she felt sick and dizzy. Blood pressure was recorded as 100/70, which is low. The pulse was said to be 64 beats per minute but irregular. She was said to look grey. Shipman claimed to have diagnosed a coronary thrombosis on the basis of these clinical signs. The record continues:
'1445 Died family informed'
.
The causes of death are set out.
The Expert Evidence
Dr John Rutherford, the pathologist, conducted the post-mortem examination and found some signs of emphysema. There was also a moderate degree of atherosclerosis, sufficient to give rise to a coronary thrombosis. So, in fact, Mrs Lomas was suffering from heart disease. However, it appears that, until that day, she had not complained of any symptoms relating to her heart. Dr Rutherford also took samples for scientific analysis and, in the light of the amount of morphine found in the tissues, he expressed the opinion that death was due to morphine poisoning. Had there not been so much morphine in the body tissues, he would have been prepared to say that the death was due to coronary thrombosis.
Dr John Grenville expressed the view that, if Shipman's claim (that Mrs Lomas collapsed as she was mounting the bed) was true, Shipman should have reacted very promptly by summoning help with resuscitation and calling an ambulance. On no account should he have left Mrs Lomas alone.
Comment
This was a clear case of murder, as the jury found, but it was clear only because of the morphine level found in the body tissues. Were it not for that evidence, this death might well have been passed off as natural, even at a post-mortem examination. The noteworthy features are:
This was a sudden death behind closed doors in Shipman's surgery. This is a very rare event in the experience of other doctors. Such an event gives rise to a high degree of suspicion. If a patient collapses at a surgery, the doctor should call for assistance and ask for an ambulance to be summoned. Shipman did not call an ambulance or request the assistance of the staff in his claimed attempt to resuscitate Mrs Lomas. In fact, there is little doubt that no such attempt was made.
Shipman chose an explanation for the death which was plausible in that Mrs Lomas had been complaining of chest pain and pain in the arm on the day of her death. It rather looks as though Shipman realised that this was pain of cardiac origin and took the opportunity to kill Mrs Lomas.
Shipman gave inconsistent accounts of events to others. To Mrs Dalpiaz, he had said he had tried resuscitation. To PC Reade, he said he had not. To Mrs Chapman, he did not say that he had. To Mrs Chapman, he said that Mrs Lomas had died in his presence, as he was trying to use the ECG machine. To PC Reade and Mrs Dalpiaz, he said Mrs Lomas had died while he was attending to another patient in another room.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001