The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Edna May Llewellyn
Introduction
Mrs Edna May Llewellyn died at her home, 6 Carter Place, Hyde on Tuesday, 4th
May 1993 at the age of 68. She had lived alone since the death of her husband in 1988. She had been a patient of Shipman since November 1978 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She held him in very high regard. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In October 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police inquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mrs Llewellyn's son, Mr Oliver Patrick Llewellyn, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of his mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Llewellyn, Mrs Margaret Elizabeth Mary Llewellyn (his wife), Mrs Edna Antonia Burrows (formerly Crossland; Mrs Edna Llewellyn's daughter), Mr Herbert Page (an old friend and neighbour of Mrs Llewellyn), Mrs Judith Anne Shaw (a friend of Mrs Burrows) and Ms Ghislaine Brant (a pharmacist at the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Llewellyn but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Llewellyn, Mrs Margaret Llewellyn, Mrs Burrows, Mr Page and Mrs Shaw. The Inquiry has also received a statement from another daughter of Mrs Llewellyn who wishes not to have her name mentioned. Mrs Margaret Llewellyn, Mrs Burrows and Mrs Shaw gave oral evidence at a hearing on Thursday, 5th
July 2001. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Llewellyn's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained reports from Dr Grenville and Professor Henry McQuay. Dr Grenville gave oral evidence about Mrs Llewellyn's death at a hearing on Monday, 23rd
July 2001.
Personal Background
Mrs Llewellyn had been in poor health for some time before her death. She was first said to have hypertension as long ago as 1971. She had a stroke in 1983. In 1985, she was first diagnosed as suffering from angina and ischaemic heart disease. Between 1989 and October 1992 she was admitted to hospital on no fewer than seven occasions, suffering from chest pain of cardiac origin, said to be due to coronary insufficiency. In February 1993, she was admitted to hospital suffering from abdominal pain. It was found that she had a hernia at the site of an old operation scar. Despite concerns about her heart, she underwent operative repair. She suffered several severe angina attacks while in hospital. Following her discharge, the wound became infected and she was readmitted in March for drainage of an abscess in the abdominal wall. She recovered uneventfully but on 21st
April she was admitted to hospital again with a history of worsening angina. An
'Echo report'
showed that the heart was enlarged and there were signs of congestion. The discharge summary, dated 17th
May 1993, refers to unstable angina, cardiac failure and mitral regurgitation. She was pain-free at that time. Dr Grenville said that, in the period before her death, Mrs Llewellyn was at a high risk of suffering a heart attack at any time.
Despite her health problems, Mrs Llewellyn lived a busy social life. She had a large family of three sons and two daughters, although two of the sons live in Australia. She loved company and did not like staying at home. Until early 1993, she regularly drove a car and would go into Hyde to shop most days. She would call on family or friends. However, following the hernia operation in February 1993, she became more dependent on her family for outings. She continued to visit as and when she could and members of her family called on her several times a week. Her daughter-in-law, Mrs Margaret Llewellyn, to whom she was very close, visited her very frequently. On the day before her death, which was a Bank Holiday Monday, she spent most of the day at the home of her daughter, Mrs Edna Burrows, then Mrs Edna Crossland. She was in good health and spirits and enjoyed the company of many members of the family.
The Day of the Death
At about 10.30am on the morning of the day she died, Mrs Llewellyn was visited by her daughter-in-law, Mrs Margaret Llewellyn, and her young grandson, Gareth. Mrs Llewellyn seemed well although a little subdued, possibly because that day was the fifth anniversary of the death of her husband. However, she was very pleased to see her grandson and appeared in normal health. She had been doing a little light housework. The two women had a drink together after which Mrs Margaret Llewellyn left to go shopping. She was to buy a few items for her mother-in-law. She took Gareth with her and also a lady who lived in the same block of flats, Mrs Edith Brock, now deceased and a victim of Shipman. They left at about 11am.
It appears that Mrs Llewellyn must have forgotten to ask her daughter-in-law to bring something she needed as, a short while later, she telephoned her friend, Mr Page, to ask him to do some shopping for her. He did so and arrived with it at Mrs Llewellyn's flat shortly before noon. Mrs Llewellyn told him she had forgotten to ask him to buy some potato mash. He went to the local shop while she began to make some sandwiches for their lunch. He returned only a few minutes later, probably just after noon. When he came in, he found the kitchen empty. He then heard a low voice call from the bathroom, 'I won't be a minute'. The bathroom door opened and Mrs Llewellyn called his name. He saw her standing by the bedroom door, holding on to the door frame and, from her expression, he knew that she was in pain. She seemed to be having difficulty in standing. He managed to support her and take her into the bedroom where he helped her to lie down on the bed. Mrs Llewellyn told Mr Page that Shipman was her doctor. He telephoned the surgery to request a visit. The surgery visits book shows that a receptionist wrote Mrs Llewellyn's name, address and telephone number, then:
'collapsed? breathing OK'
. Mr Page was told that Shipman was already intending to visit another resident at Carter Place and that he would be there in ten minutes. He returned to the bedroom to tell Mrs Llewellyn. She told Mr Page that she had chest pain but that it was getting easier.
Mrs Margaret Llewellyn returned. Her recollection is that the time was 12.20pm. She says that Mr Page told her that her mother-in-law had had a dizzy spell and was resting on the bed. She went into the bedroom to see her mother-in-law, who she says was 'fine' and told her not to worry as she was 'OK'. She said she had had a dizzy spell and that she had a few pins and needles in her hand but, other than that, she was 'OK'. When asked the question directly by counsel, Mrs Margaret Llewellyn said that her mother-in-law had told her that she had had some pain but that it had now gone. She did not have the appearance of 'sweatiness' which Mrs Margaret Llewellyn had observed on occasions when her mother-in-law had had an angina attack in the past.
Mrs Margaret Llewellyn says that she then went into the kitchen to make her mother-in-law a sandwich and a cup of tea. She says that Mrs Llewellyn sat on the side of the bed and ate the sandwich and drank the tea. Mr Page's recollection is different in that he recalls that he made the cup of tea and took it and the sandwiches into the bedroom. He says that Mrs Llewellyn was not well enough to eat anything. She wanted to sit up to drink the tea but was encouraged by both Mrs Margaret Llewellyn and him to lie down until the doctor arrived. He recalls that she leaned on her elbow to take a sip of tea. Mrs Margaret Llewellyn did not agree with that account. However, both agree that, while they were waiting for the doctor, Mrs Llewellyn said that her chest pain had eased. I do not think it is possible for me to resolve the conflict of evidence between Mr Page and Mrs Margaret Llewellyn as to whether Mrs Llewellyn was well enough to eat a sandwich. Mr Page was not able to give evidence to the Inquiry. However, I think it unlikely that at that time anyone thought or said that Mrs Llewellyn had had a dizzy spell. I think it far more likely that it was recognised that she had had an episode of chest pain. I accept that Mrs Llewellyn did not appear hot and sweating by the time Mrs Margaret Llewellyn returned. I think that, by that time, the worst of this attack was over and the pain had eased.
Shipman arrived at some time between about 12.40pm and 12.50pm and went straight into the bedroom. The others waited in the lounge. The bedroom door remained open. Both Mr Page and Mrs Margaret Llewellyn agree that, after a while, Shipman came out of the bedroom, went out to his car, then returned and went back into the bedroom. Again, the bedroom door remained open. Their evidence of what, if anything, Shipman said to them on his way out and back differs. Mr Page says that Shipman said nothing to them as he went out or on coming back in. Mrs Margaret Llewellyn says that Shipman told her that he was going to give her mother-in-law an injection for the pain.
Mrs Margaret Llewellyn remembers that, during one of the periods when Shipman was in the bedroom, she went to the bathroom. As she returned to the lounge, she could see into the bedroom out of the corner of her eye. She thought Shipman was standing over the bed.
Both Mr Page and Mrs Margaret Llewellyn say that they heard nothing while Shipman was in the bedroom. Mrs Llewellyn says that he was in the bedroom the first time for about three or four minutes and about five minutes on the second occasion. Mr Page suggests that these periods were a little longer. I am satisfied that Shipman had only been in the house for a total of about 10 to 15 minutes when he came out of the bedroom for the second time. Mrs Margaret Llewellyn says that he had taken off his jacket and tie and that he looked very flushed. He said, in a way which Mrs Llewellyn found totally unsympathetic, 'I am sorry, she's dead, she has had a massive heart attack'. Mr Page did not hear that, but I am sure that these words, or something like them, were said. Mrs Margaret Llewellyn remembers that she screamed at Shipman to call an ambulance but he said it was too late for that; Mrs Llewellyn was already dead. Both witnesses recall Shipman saying something to the effect that he had tried giving Mrs Llewellyn heart massage but to no avail. Mrs Margaret Llewellyn ran out of the house crying and a neighbour came to console her. When giving evidence, she said that there were two telephones in the house, one in the lounge and the other on the bedside table. The ambulance station was close by on Dewsnap Lane.
Shipman advised Mrs Margaret Llewellyn to call an undertaker and then left. He said he had to visit another patient nearby.
A while later, Mrs Margaret Llewellyn went into the bedroom and saw her mother-in-law's body. She was lying on the bed on her back and appeared to be asleep. However one eye was half-open. She was facing towards the window. She was fully dressed and her clothes did not appear to have been disturbed.
Mr Page's account is slightly different but these discrepancies are no more than one would expect when two people are trying to remember details of an event which occurred over eight years previously and which was extremely distressing for both of them. He recalls that, after Shipman had said it was too late to call an ambulance, he stood close to Mr Page and said that he had been trying to resuscitate Mrs Llewellyn for about 15 minutes and that he had given her morphine to alleviate her pain. Mr Page thought this strange as, shortly before Shipman had arrived, Mrs Llewellyn had said that her pain had eased. Mr Page followed Shipman back into Mrs Llewellyn's bedroom. He could see that she was dead, lying motionless with her eyes open and flat on her back. Her clothes did not appear to have been disturbed.
At about 1pm, Mrs Margaret Llewellyn telephoned her sister-in-law, Mrs Edna Burrows, at her place of work, a nursing home in Dukinfield. Within a short time, Mrs Burrows arrived at her mother's flat, in company with her friend and colleague, Mrs Judith Shaw, who is a nurse by profession. Mrs Burrows wanted to see her mother's body and Mrs Shaw went into the room with her. Mrs Burrows was greatly distressed at the sight and cried out that the body did not seem to be her mother. She found it difficult to describe but said that her mother's face looked bloated. The mouth was slightly open.
Mrs Shaw also saw the body and told the Inquiry that it appeared to her that Mrs Llewellyn's face looked black and swollen. She said that the tongue appeared to be protruding from the mouth. The upper clothes did not appear to have been disturbed. She would have expected them to be disturbed if an attempt at resuscitation had been made. Mrs Shaw's description of Mrs Llewellyn does not accord with Mrs Margaret Llewellyn's recollection. Nor did Mr Page observe any abnormality of the face. However, Mrs Burrows' distress and her impression that the face was bloated add credibility to Mrs Shaw's description. Mrs Shaw is a nurse and has seen many bodies in death.
Shipman recorded the death very briefly in the medical records. He wrote:
'1325 CT.
Attempted resuscitation failed
10mgs morphine given IV'
.
I understand this to mean that, at 1.25pm, Mrs Llewellyn had had a coronary thrombosis and had died despite Shipman's attempts at resuscitation. He had administered 10mg morphine intravenously.
Certification
Shipman signed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), which stated that the death was caused by a coronary thrombosis, which was due to ischaemic heart disease. The onset of the coronary thrombosis was less than one hour before death. Hypertension had contributed to the death but was not related to the condition that caused the death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate saying that the time of death was
'1325hrs'
. All the witnesses are adamant that the death must have occurred before 1pm. However, I do not think this is a significant issue. Whether the death occurred at 12.50pm as the family believes or at 1.25pm, as Shipman has stated, does not help me to decide whether he caused it. Whenever it happened, the death occurred while Shipman was alone with Mrs Llewellyn in her bedroom. Shipman stated that he had attended Mrs Llewellyn for half an hour during her final illness and that he had then carried out a complete external examination. That he might have exaggerated the length of time he was with Mrs Llewellyn does not help me to decide whether he killed her. The cause of death was coronary thrombosis, which was due to ischaemic heart disease, as stated on the MCCD. The mode of death was said to be collapse of one hour's duration. Shipman said that he and Mrs Llewellyn's daughter-in-law were present at the death. With that answer, he gives a false impression. In fact, he was alone with Mrs Llewellyn at the moment of death, although Mrs Margaret Llewellyn was present in the house. He said that his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death came partly from his own observations and partly from statements made by the daughter-in-law. Here again, Shipman misleads the reader. Mrs Margaret Llewellyn did not give Shipman any information about the cause or mode of death and was not in a position to do so. These two lies were in my view intended to give the impression that Shipman was not alone with his patient in the period immediately preceding her death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker found the case highly suspicious on the basis of the cremation certification. It is likely that his suspicion was aroused because the death occurred in Shipman's presence. Professor Baker also found the case highly suspicious on the basis of the medical notes and records. He said that sudden death was a possibility as there was a history of ischaemic heart disease. He was suspicious because no signs or symptoms were recorded which would have justified a diagnosis of coronary thrombosis, an ambulance was not called and morphine was administered. He observed that Mrs Llewellyn was the victim of
'under-treatment or worse'
.
Dr Grenville noted Mrs Llewellyn's long history of ischaemic heart disease and said that she was, therefore, at very high risk of heart attack. He considered that if Mrs Llewellyn did experience chest pains at about midday (as I am satisfied that she did), it seems likely that she had had a mild angina attack. However, if the pain had subsided by the time the doctor arrived (as I am satisfied that it had), the attack was virtually over. Dr Grenville does not think that Mrs Llewellyn had had a heart attack before Shipman arrived. Her pain would not have subsided so quickly. He said that it was theoretically possible, although unlikely, that she could have suffered a massive heart attack just as Shipman entered the bedroom. But, had that happened, Dr Grenville would have expected Shipman to realise what was happening and to react appropriately. He would have called an ambulance and would have arranged her admission to hospital. If she was in severe pain while they were waiting, he could have given her a small dose of morphine, injecting it very gradually and observing its effect as it was administered. If she had gone into cardio-respiratory arrest, as Shipman implies in his note, he should have begun resuscitation procedures and should have called upon Mrs Margaret Llewellyn to assist, first in lifting the patient onto the floor or other hard surface and then possibly in giving external cardiac massage. Dr Grenville said that it would probably have been necessary to undo Mrs Llewellyn's upper clothing to do this. That Shipman did not summon an ambulance or call for help with resuscitation are grounds for suspicion.
Dr Grenville said that up to 10mg morphine, given slowly, would be appropriate if the patient was suffering severe chest pain. This should have been given over a period of several minutes and, when it provided relief, the administration should have ceased. Dr Grenville was aware, as I am, of other cases in which Shipman had claimed to give an appropriately modest dose of opiate drug to relieve cardiac pain but the patients had died. This made him suspect that Shipman had given a far greater dose than that which he had admitted. What is known of Shipman's practice of obtaining and carrying diamorphine suggests that Shipman probably used diamorphine rather than morphine. His habit of obtaining 30mg ampoules of diamorphine at that time gives rise to grave suspicion that he might have used such an ampoule on Mrs Llewellyn. That quantity would be lethal. Dr Grenville suggested that it was far more likely that death was due to a lethal dose of diamorphine than that Mrs Llewellyn suffered a severe heart attack leading to cardiac arrest, just as Shipman entered her bedroom.
In his report to the police, Dr Grenville said that the description given by Mrs Shaw of Mrs Llewellyn's appearance after her death would be consistent with asphyxia. This appearance could occur during cardiac arrest due to a heart attack or could have been caused by obstruction of Mrs Llewellyn's breathing by swallowing an object. Dr Grenville did not say whether, in his view, the suppression of the body's normal breathing mechanism by the administration of diamorphine might result in this appearance. His observation is limited to the mechanical obstructions of the mechanism of breathing, rather than biological or chemical suppression.
Professor McQuay has now provided additional advice in the light of the knowledge that Mrs Llewellyn had been prescribed opioid drugs while in hospital recovering from her operation and again about a week before her death. He advised that sufficient time had passed for Mrs Llewellyn's body to have adjusted to an opioid naïve state. If Shipman gave what was usually a lethal dose of diamorphine, Mrs Llewellyn would probably have died within the usual period of time. Following a lethal dose of diamorphine administered intravenously, death will usually follow within a few minutes.
Professor McQuay said that the description of Mrs Llewellyn's bloated appearance after death might be consistent with a death due to asphyxiation. However, he noted that not all the witnesses noticed this appearance. He suggested that it was possible that Mrs Llewellyn's tongue had fallen back and had obstructed her airway. This might have caused some asphyxiation, which had contributed to the death.
Other Matters
As a postscript to the evidence in this case, on 5th
May 1993, the day after Mrs Llewellyn's death, a 30mg ampoule of diamorphine was dispensed from the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy, Market Street, Hyde in the name of Mrs Llewellyn following presentation of a prescription issued by Shipman.
Conclusion
There can be no doubt from the established medical history that Mrs Llewellyn was at very high risk of suffering a sudden cardiac death.
On the day of her death, she had an episode which, in my view, was probably an angina attack. However, I am satisfied that the attack was short-lived and that her pain had eased while she was resting on the bed before Shipman arrived.
Shipman would then have us believe that Mrs Llewellyn suffered a massive heart attack, suffered great pain (for which he gave her a small dose of morphine) and went into cardiac arrest, which all his best efforts at resuscitation failed to resolve. That is a possible series of events. However, I agree with Dr Grenville that, if this happened, it was a remarkable coincidence that it should happen at the very moment that Shipman walked in. Such coincidences seemed to happen often in his professional life and they hardly ever seem to happen to other doctors. Several things point against this having happened, particularly Shipman's failure to call an ambulance or for assistance in his resuscitation attempt.
The lies told in Form B of the cremation certificate, which, as I have said, appear to me to be designed to give the impression that Shipman was not alone with the patient at the time of death, increase my suspicion. It seems to me that by far the most likely explanation for Mrs Llewellyn's death is that Shipman gave a much larger dose of diamorphine than he claimed, knowing and intending that it would cause death.
I was at one stage mystified by the evidence of Mrs Shaw, in which she describes Mrs Llewellyn's face as bloated and discoloured. The evidence of this appearance is not clear but I think there was probably some degree of bloating. Professor McQuay has suggested that this could have been caused by Mrs Llewellyn's tongue falling back and obstructing her airway. As I understand the position, this might well have happened when she lost consciousness, following an injection of opiate. I think this is the most likely explanation for the appearance noticed by Mrs Shaw. This does not affect my main conclusion which is that I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Llewellyn by means of lethal diamorphine overdose.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001