The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Renee Lacey
Introduction
Mrs Renee Lacey died on Thursday, 6th
June 1996 at her home at the age of 63. She had been a patient of Shipman since 1992 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of her death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the lung with carcinoma of the breast as a significant contributing condition.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions, Mrs Lacey's widower, Mr James Anthony Lacey, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of his wife's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Lacey, Mrs Anne Rebecca Bowler, the younger daughter of Mr and Mrs Lacey, and Mr John Paul Logue, the consultant clinical oncologist who had previously treated Mrs Lacey at the Christie Hospital, Manchester.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Lacey but an inquest into her death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Lacey, Ms Eileen Mavourneen Lacey, the elder daughter of Mr and Mrs Lacey, and Mrs Bowler. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Lacey's computerised general practitioner notes dating back to September 1995. Other general practitioner notes have not survived. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Lacey's hospital records, and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
When quite young, Mrs Lacey suffered from tuberculosis and had a lung removed. She recovered well and enjoyed a career as an education welfare officer. She retired early as she began to show signs of Alzheimer's disease. This did not progress and she and her husband enjoyed life together.
In 1994, Mrs Lacey visited a mobile breast-scanning unit in Hyde and was diagnosed as having developed breast cancer. The cancer spread to her lung and, in August 1995, she underwent radiotherapy at the Christie Hospital. Mr Logue saw Mrs Lacey in April 1996, when she was complaining of pain in her lower back. X-rays were taken and confirmed the presence of the previously treated lung cancer. However, there was no definite evidence of secondary cancer and a review was scheduled for August 1996. Mr and Mrs Lacey were pleased and began to plan a holiday.
A few weeks later, towards the end of May, Mrs Lacey felt ill when she awoke and decided to stay in bed. Over the next few days, she slept a great deal but was reasonably well when awake. After a few days, Mr Lacey telephoned his daughter, Eileen, who lived in Oxford, and asked her to come and help to care for her mother. Before she came north, she spoke to Shipman on the telephone. He was rather 'offhand' in his manner and told her that her mother's cancer was malignant.
When Ms Lacey arrived at her parents' home, she realised immediately that her mother was terminally ill. She was extremely thin. However, she did not appear to be in a great deal of pain. Ms Lacey telephoned Shipman and asked him to visit her mother. There is an entry in the visits book for 30th May which says:
'Rene Lacey...not recognising daughter. Very thin'
.
Shipman visited that day and Mrs Lacey went upstairs with him and was present during the consultation. Shipman said that Mrs Lacey had Alzheimer's disease and, due to the nature of her cancer, she was 'unlikely to live out the year'. Ms Lacey was left with the impression that her mother would die within months or perhaps weeks, but certainly not days. Shipman said that he would arrange for Mrs Lacey to be admitted to St. Ann's Hospice. Mr Lacey was not at home during this visit but arrived just as Shipman was leaving. Shipman said that Mr Lacey's daughter would tell him what had been said. Mr Lacey recalls his daughter telling him that Shipman had said Mrs Lacey would be admitted to the hospice within two to four days. There are entries in the computerised medical records for 30th
May, one of which reads:
'Shared care - hospice/GP ref'
.
Soon after this, Ms Lacey returned to her home in Oxford.
The surgery visits book records Shipman's intention to revisit Mrs Lacey on Monday, 3rd
June, Wednesday, 5th
June and Thursday, 6th
June. The computerised medical records also record visits on each of these dates. The entry for 3rd
June 1996 records:
'Terminal care...chat doughter
(
sic
)
'
. The entry for 5th
June records: '
H/O: high risk medication...mst 10 bd temazepam 10'
. MST is morphine sulphate, which is taken orally. This is the only prescription for pain-relieving drugs that Mrs Lacey appears to have received. The family does not report that she was in pain.
Mrs Bowler recalls being at her parents' house one day shortly before her mother's death. Shipman visited and went upstairs alone to see Mrs Lacey. Afterwards he told Mrs Bowler that her mother was deteriorating because her normal routines had been taken away, and that he would come again on Thursday.
The Day of the Death
On Thursday, 6th
June, Mrs Lacey was in much the same condition as she had been in for some days. Although she was spending most of her time in bed, from time to time she would get up. She was able to talk to her husband. Shipman arrived at about 3pm and Mr Lacey let him in. Shipman walked through the hallway and up the stairs. Mr Lacey started to follow him when Shipman stopped him and told him to wait downstairs. Shipman came down a few minutes later and said that Mrs Lacey had liquid on her lungs and he would 'have to get it out'. He went to his car and returned a few seconds later, proceeded up the stairs and again told Mr Lacey to wait downstairs. Mr Lacey had not seen his wife in the intervening period. A few minutes later, Shipman called from the top of the stairs and said that Mr Lacey could now come up.
When Mr Lacey went into the bedroom, he saw his wife lying in bed. Shipman told him to sit down and take her hand. Shipman took her other hand as though he was taking her pulse. He then said, 'No, no, she's gone. There is no chance. What time is it?' The time was 3.20pm. With hindsight, Mr Lacey believes that his wife was already dead when he entered the room and that Shipman's taking of the pulse was a charade.
Downstairs, Mr Lacey said to Shipman that he thought his wife should have been in hospital. Shipman asked, 'Would you really want to have seen her with tubes and stuff stuck up her nose?' Shipman said that he would ring Mr Lacey's daughters. Mrs Bowler was at home when she received the telephone call from Shipman. He said, 'I think you know what I'm phoning for'. Mrs Bowler thought it was regarding a hospice for her mother and said so. Shipman replied, 'Oh no, she's died, are you coming up?' Mrs Bowler, who was pregnant, went to her parents' home. Shipman was still there and said that he wanted her to see her mother. Mrs Bowler did not wish to do so but Shipman insisted and took her by the hand. Mrs Lacey looked very peaceful. Later, when Mr Lacey recounted the events of the day to his daughter, she thought that perhaps Shipman had given her mother some extra morphine and had killed her. However, she did not say anything as she did not think she would 'get anywhere'.
The final entry in the computerised medical records, dated 6th
June 1996, records:
'1520 carcinomatosis calung/bre'
. I interpret this to mean that on 6th
June, Mrs Lacey died at 3.20pm of carcinomatosis and carcinoma of the lung and breast. There is no record of any consultation that day while Mrs Lacey was alive and no reference to the need to remove fluid from Mrs Lacey's lungs. The record is misleading in that it gives the impression that Shipman arrived after the death.
Certification
Shipman completed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), in which he stated that the death was caused by carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the lung. Carcinoma of the breast was certified to be a condition contributing to death but not related to the carcinomatosis. The approximate interval between the onset of the carcinoma and death was said to be one year. It seems likely that Shipman's entry on the MCCD was not entirely accurate. From the history, it appears that the original cancer was in the breast and that it spread to the lung. The correct cause of death would therefore be carcinomatosis due to the carcinoma of the breast. However, nothing of importance turns on this.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He recorded the time of death as
'1520'
. He said that he had last seen Mrs Lacey alive 15 minutes before her death and saw her about ten minutes after death. He said that the mode of death was coma lasting four to six hours. That was not true, as Mr Lacey had been talking to his wife only a short time before Shipman's arrival. Shipman recorded that his answers as to cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and on statements made by Mr Lacey. He said that both he and Mr Lacey were present at the moment of death. These answers give the misleading impression that Mrs Lacey was in a coma for some hours before death, that Mr Lacey had been able to provide information about her condition to Shipman and that they had both been in the bedroom at the moment of death.
Conclusion
Mrs Lacey was very unwell in the months before she died although there was no definite evidence of secondary cancer in April 1996 when she was reviewed by Mr Logue. When she deteriorated towards the end of May, it appears that Shipman himself diagnosed her as suffering from malignant cancer and did not seek to confirm the diagnosis by referring her back to the Christie Hospital. When Shipman saw her on 30th
May, he told the family that he would arrange for Mrs Lacey to be admitted to a hospice. It is not known whether he tried to make arrangements for her to be admitted. Certainly the family was not given any further information in the remaining days of Mrs Lacey's life. On the day before Mrs Lacey's death, Shipman prescribed oral morphine although the family does not recall that Mrs Lacey was in pain. However, Shipman might quite properly have given oral morphine as a euphoric drug.
On 6th
June, Shipman acted in a very unusual manner. He prevented Mr Lacey from being present during his consultation with his wife. If Shipman had seen Mrs Lacey and she had asked to speak to Shipman alone, this action would be perfectly understandable. However, Shipman unilaterally decided that Mr Lacey should be absent before he had seen Mrs Lacey that day. During a previous consultation with Mrs Lacey, Shipman had had no objection to her daughter being present. The fact that Shipman engineered an opportunity to be alone with Mrs Lacey is a highly suspicious factor. He had an opportunity to inject her with diamorphine. A few minutes before Shipman arrived, she was speaking to her husband. A few minutes after Shipman's arrival, she was dead. That is sufficient to persuade me that he must have killed her. That he had prescribed oral morphine the day before suggests that he might well have decided that he would end Mrs Lacey's life when he had a suitable opportunity. If there should be a post-mortem examination, the morphine in her body would be readily explained.
The misleading entries made by Shipman on Form B of the cremation certificate were, in my view, designed to create the impression that Mrs Lacey had been close to death for some hours when he arrived; that this was a typical death from carcinomatosis; and that he and Mr Lacey were together at the bedside at the moment of death. I note also that Shipman did not carry out a full external examination and did no more than to feel for a pulse at Mrs Lacey's wrist. As Dr John Grenville has explained, such a brief examination is not sufficient to satisfy the doctor that the patient is really dead. That Shipman should make so brief an examination suggests that he already knew Mrs Lacey was dead and there was no need to examine her.
I am entirely satisfied that Shipman took Mrs Lacey's life on 6th
June 1996. It may well be that she would not have lived long, but he deprived her and her family of their proper opportunity to prepare themselves for her death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001