The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Dorothy Long
Introduction
Mrs Dorothy Long was found dead at her home, 10 Woodfield Avenue, Hyde on Sunday, 15th
March 1998 at the age of 84. Mrs Long's death is entered in the register of deaths as having occurred on Friday, 13th
March 1998 and I have concluded, from the evidence available to this Inquiry, that she died on that day. Mrs Long had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
Mrs Long's death was one of those brought to the attention of the police during the March 1998 investigation and it was, therefore, one of the first to be investigated in August 1998. The police took statements from Mr Geoffrey Rhodes (Mrs Long's now deceased brother), Ms Beryl Monte (a neighbour), Mrs Sheila Brown and Ms Nora Mason (friends of Mrs Long), Mr Jeremy Kenneth Baines (an ambulance technician), PC Julian David King, Mr Philip Robert Barr (a funeral director) and Dr Alistair MacGillivary (a general practitioner based at the Brooke Surgery). The police also obtained a statement from Detective Sergeant John Ashley (a police officer with specialist knowledge in computers).
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Long but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken witness statements from Mrs Brown, Ms Mason and Mrs Angela Page, who was Mrs Long's hairdresser. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Long's general practitioner records, and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The ambulance records were also considered. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Long was a widow and lived alone. She was physically fit, very mobile and active within the community. Her medical records show that she suffered from slightly raised blood pressure but no other illness or disease. Her blood pressure was well controlled by medication.
Mr Rhodes visited his sister about a week before her death. He told the police that Mrs Long seemed physically well and she made no mention to him of having recently seen any doctor. He thought that his sister's death was sudden and unexpected.
Mrs Brown told the police that she visited Mrs Long at home on the afternoon of Thursday, 12th
March 1998. Mrs Long was cheerful and appeared fit and well. They arranged to meet at church that weekend. In her statement to the Inquiry, Mrs Brown says that she last saw Mrs Long alive at Bible class on the afternoon of Thursday, 11th
March. In fact, Thursday was 12th
March.
The Death
According to Mrs Page, Mrs Long was due at the salon for a hairdressing appointment at 11am on Saturday, 14th
March 1998. She did not arrive, which Mrs Page thought most unusual, as Mrs Long was very reliable. Mrs Page thought there must have been a misunderstanding about the arrangement. Mrs Brown also expected to see Mrs Long at church that morning. When she did not attend, Mrs Brown assumed that she had gone to the hairdressers.
In her witness statement to the police, Ms Monte said that she saw Mrs Long mowing her front lawn on the afternoon of Saturday, 14th
March. Ms Monte's recollection may be correct, but the fact that Mrs Long had attended neither the church nor her hairdressing appointment that morning suggests strongly that Mrs Long was either very unwell or had even died by then. As Ms Monte made her police statement about eight months after the events in question, it is possible that it was on Friday, 13th
March or some other day earlier in that week that she saw Mrs Long mowing her lawn.
Both Mrs Brown and Ms Mason went to St George's Church, Hyde, as usual, on the morning of Sunday, 15th
March 1998. Mrs Long was not at the service, which was very unusual. After the service ended, at about 11.30am, the two ladies decided to call on Mrs Long to see if she was all right. They arrived at the house at about 11.50am. Mrs Brown knocked on the door but there was no answer. Two bottles of milk were on the doorstep, which would suggest that the previous day's delivery of milk had not been taken in. Mrs Brown then tried the front door, which was unlocked. This was most unusual. Mrs Brown and Ms Mason went inside.
In the rear living room, Mrs Brown and Ms Mason discovered Mrs Long. She was dead. She was fully clothed and her dentures were on the floor nearby. The witnesses have found it difficult to describe Mrs Long's position. Mrs Brown says that she was sitting on the floor, leaning against an armchair, with her legs tucked underneath her. Her left arm was across the chair and her right arm hung at her side. It appeared to Mrs Brown that she had slid off the chair as she tried to get up. Ms Mason recalls that Mrs Long was half on and half off a settee. Her bottom was on the settee and she was leaning back into the settee and to the right. Her upper arm was leaning against the armrest. Her feet were on the floor and her legs bent. It looked to Ms Mason as though Mrs Long had been trying to lean back into the settee but 'had not made it'.
Ms Mason telephoned for an ambulance and one arrived promptly. The ambulance log shows that the call was received at 11.43am and that the ambulance crew arrived on the scene at 11.52am. The ambulance crew was notified that Shipman was Mrs Long's general practitioner. They asked for the police to attend and it would appear that Shipman was also called. The ambulance service form diagnosing death states that Mrs Long was in a state of rigor mortis. When the police arrived, the ambulance crew left the scene.
PC King attended at 12.30pm. His notebook reads as follows:
'12.30
10, Woodfield Avenue,
Hyde re sudden death
Dorothy Long 83 yrs
Spoke to ambulance
crew. Life extinct
11.55 hrs -Robert
Murphy, Jeremy
Baines, call sign
212, station Dukinfield
search house - all in
order.
1305
Dr Shipman arrival
21 Market Street
Hyde tel: 367
9777 DR to
certify/issue: 13.15
HF Shipman'
.
According to PC King, Shipman told him that Mrs Long had been receiving treatment from him and that as far as he was concerned, she had died from natural causes. He said that he would issue a death certificate. Shipman signed PC King's pocket notebook to that effect. Mr Rhodes arrived at about 2pm and, after a short discussion with him, PC King left the house.
Mrs Long's death was quite unexpected by her friends and family.
Mrs Long's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for 12th
, 13th
, 14th
or 15th
March 1998. Nor is there any record in the appointments sheets that she was to be seen in the surgery on any of those days. The most recent entry in the handwritten records refers to a consultation in 1993. The two most recent entries in the computerised records relate to appointments on 23rd
October 1997 (for hypertension monitoring) and on Thursday, 5th
March 1998. This latter entry reads as follows:
'had a chat to patient
re tabs needs to stay on them despite age'
.
DS Ashley analysed the history of the entries made on Shipman's surgery computer and found that this entry was created at 4.21pm on the afternoon of 13th
March 1998. There is no record of Mrs Long's name in the practice appointments sheets or the practice visits book for 5th
March 1998 or, as noted above, for 13th
March 1998.
The appointments sheets for 13th
March show that Shipman had very few patients to see in surgery. He would almost certainly have finished the morning surgery by 11am, if not earlier, and would have been free to visit patients until about 2pm. In the afternoon he would have been free to visit patients from about 2.30pm until 4pm. The visits book records that he had four patients to visit at home. The medical representatives diary shows three names on that day but they were not booked in for specific times. They might not have seen Shipman personally. Shipman would have had time to visit Mrs Long had he chosen to do so.
It is inherently improbable that the need to make an entry about a chat on 5th
March 1998 came spontaneously to Shipman's mind on Friday, 13th
March 1998. The fact that there is absolutely no corroboration of a visit on that day suggests that the entry is a fabrication. It seems likely that something prompted him to make the entry on Friday, 13th
March. The fact that it was made at or about the time when Mrs Long might well have died suggests that there might be a connection between the death and the making of the entry. That the entry was made before Mrs Long's friends were aware of her death, suggests that Shipman might have known about the death before anyone else.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) on Monday, 16th
March 1998. He said that he had last seen Mrs Long alive on 5th
March 1998. He said that there would be no post-mortem examination. He had seen the body after death. He said that the disease or condition directly leading to the death was cerebrovascular accident of seconds in duration and that he had been treating Mrs Long for hypertension for two years.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Long died at about
'2000 hours'
on 13th March 1998 at her home address. He said that he had attended Mrs Long for nine days during her last illness and that he last saw her alive nine days before her death. It is difficult to see which last illness he was referring to unless it was hypertension. The causes of death were again said to be cerebrovascular accident and hypertension. The mode of death was said to be syncope lasting minutes only. Shipman's views as to the cause and mode of death were said to be based on statements made by paramedics and neighbours. Shipman said that paramedics were present at the moment of death. This latter statement was obviously untrue. The paramedics and neighbours could not have told Shipman anything which enabled him to certify the cause of death or describe its mode.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker examined the information contained in the cremation certificate and found the case moderately suspicious, although at that time he did not know whether the paramedics had been present at the death. On the basis of the contents of Mrs Long's medical records, Professor Baker found the case highly suspicious. He referred specifically to the absence of any clear explanation for the cause of death.
In his report to the Inquiry, Dr Grenville explained that Mrs Long's blood pressure readings after June 1996 were entirely acceptable and that her hypertension was obviously well controlled by medication. Her last repeat prescription was issued on 12th
February 1998 and she would have had about two weeks' supply left when she died. Quite apart from the delayed recording of the information, supposedly relating to the consultation on 5th
March 1998, Dr Grenville comments that there is no reason why Mrs Long should have consulted Shipman on that date about her medication since she had ordered a repeat prescription only three weeks earlier. If Shipman did not in fact see Mrs Long on that date, then he had not seen her for about five months and he should not have signed the MCCD without at least having first discussed the matter with the coroner. Whilst cerebrovascular accident is a possible cause of sudden death in a patient with known hypertension, there are other possible causes and the death should in any event have come as a surprise to Shipman, as it came as a surprise to Mrs Long's friends.
Dr Grenville makes the point that the position in which Mrs Long was found was an unusual position for one of Shipman's victims to be found dead. He says it is not consistent with the intravenous administration of a lethal dose of opiate since, in such circumstances, it is likely that the injection would have been administered while Mrs Long was sitting in the chair and that she would have become unconscious while still in that position. While I do not reject Dr Grenville's opinion on this point, I would have thought it possible that, if Mrs Long had not been sitting securely on the chair (for example because she was on the edge), she might have slipped from the chair as she fell into unconsciousness. Other victims of Shipman have been found on the floor near a chair from which they have fallen, for example Mrs Mavis Pickup.
Conclusion
In my view, it is highly likely that Shipman killed Mrs Long on the afternoon of Friday, 13th
March.
Mrs Long showed no sign of illness in the days and weeks before she died. Her death was sudden and quite unexpected by all who knew her. Although she had a history of raised blood pressure, this was well controlled by medication. If this was a natural death, Shipman could not possibly have known its cause. There was no proper basis on which he could have concluded that it was due to a cerebrovascular accident. He should have referred the case to the coroner, with a view to a post-mortem examination.
There is no direct evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Long on 13th
, 14th
or 15th
March 1998. However, there is evidence from which I can infer that he probably did. He certainly had the time to do so but that is not significantly probative. He made an entry in the medical records in the late afternoon of 13th
March, for which the only rational explanation I can think of is that he knew that Mrs Long was dead and wished to create a false entry in her records to give the impression that he had seen her on 5th
March. Shipman's usual motive in claiming to have seen a deceased patient alive within 14 days before the death was to avoid contact with the coroner. This fabricated entry and the assumed wish to avoid contact with the coroner is not of itself probative of guilt, as Shipman sometimes told such lies in cases where he had not killed the patient. I think sometimes he wished to avoid the trouble of a referral and possibly wished to spare the deceased's family the additional distress. However, Shipman also told this type of lie in many cases where he had killed his patient and this lie is certainly consistent with a guilty desire to avoid a referral to the coroner.
Quite apart from Shipman's false claim that he had seen Mrs Long alive on 5th
March, his entries on Form B are a tissue of lies. First, Shipman claimed that he knew the time of Mrs Long's death. If this was a natural death and the body was found on Sunday morning, there is no way in which Shipman could have known or deduced that Mrs Long died at 8pm on Friday, 13th
March. In my view, he must have decided to put that time because it suited him for some reason. In other cases where he has done this, and there are many of them, I have almost always concluded that he has picked a time so as to create the impression that the patient died a considerable time after his own visit. If Shipman visited Mrs Long on the Friday afternoon, he would not know whether or not he had been observed. It would help him to avoid any suspicion if he could establish that the death occurred some hours later.
Shipman also falsely claimed that he had been treating Mrs Long in connection with her last illness for nine days. Even on the face of the false record he himself made, this can be seen to be untrue. On 5th
March, eight days before the death, Shipman does not claim that Mrs Long had any illness, only that he advised her to keep taking her tablets.
The most blatant and obvious lie appears where Shipman stated on Form B that the paramedics were present at the moment of death. This is bizarre, as the body was not found for almost two days after the death, on Shipman's own assessment of the time of death. This demonstrates Shipman's apparent confidence that no one would check the truth, or even consistency, of his answers. Shipman's claim that the paramedics and neighbours had provided information from which he could diagnose the cause of death or describe its mode and duration is plainly false.
A further cause for suspicion that Shipman killed Mrs Long arises from the position of her dentures. I have come across a number of cases in which a deceased patient has been found with dentures removed and one case where they had disappeared altogether. I do not fully understand the significance of this, although Dr Grenville may well have been right when he suggested that Shipman might have had a bad experience, when a patient's dentures became dislodged and possibly stuck in the throat as the patient became unconscious. Dr Grenville suggested that Shipman might have thought it prudent to remove dentures to avoid such an event. Whether or not that is right, I do think that where a patient is found dead without his or her dentures, that amounts to evidence that Shipman has been there.
As I have said, I think it is highly likely that Shipman killed Mrs Long. I stop short of saying that I am sure, because of two factors. It is possible that Ms Monte was right when she said that she saw Mrs Long alive on Saturday, 14th
March. Shipman would have been far less likely to visit her on a Saturday afternoon than a Friday. Second, I acknowledge that Mrs Long's position in death was not typical of that of most of Shipman's victims. Her position gives rise to a possibility that her death was natural. That said, I think it far more likely that Shipman killed her.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001