The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Carrie Leigh
Introduction
Mrs Carrie Leigh died at her home, 26 Joel Lane, Gee Cross, Hyde on Tuesday, 16th
July 1996 at the age of 81. She had been a patient of Shipman since January 1994. He had been recommended to her by Mrs Hilda Mary Hibbert, who was killed by Shipman in January 1996. Mrs Leigh was impressed with the care given to her by Shipman in the treatment of her complex medical conditions. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease due to hypertension.
In October 1998, Mrs Leigh's daughter, Professor Christine Mary Palmer, contacted the police to express concern about her mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Professor Palmer and Mr Arthur Stafford, a friend of Mrs Leigh.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Leigh but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Professor Palmer, Miss Elizabeth Brenda Leigh (Mrs Leigh's other daughter), Mrs Judith Wheeler (Mrs Leigh's niece), Mrs Lily Palmer (Mrs Leigh's friend), Mr John Lyonel Wilde (the son of Mrs Dorothy Wilde, Mrs Leigh's friend) and Mr Peter Warrender and Ms Lynda Yarwood (Mrs Leigh's neighbours). An Inquiry solicitor has also spoken to Mr George Gee (an acquaintance of Mrs Leigh) and to several of Mrs Leigh's former neighbours.
Professor Palmer and Miss Leigh gave oral evidence at a hearing on 16th
October 2001. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Leigh's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. In addition, a report has been obtained from Dr John Grenville, who gave oral evidence on 13th
November 2001.
Personal Background
Mrs Leigh had been a widow for many years and lived alone. She had a long medical history. She suffered from polymyalgia rheumatica and underwent replacement of both hips, the right in 1974 and the left in 1988. In 1983, following a myocardial infarction and severe angina, she underwent triple coronary artery bypass grafts. Thereafter, she suffered intermittent episodes of loss of consciousness but there is no indication that she ever suffered any overt signs of ischaemic heart disease. Dr Grenville says that it is possible that she developed atheromatous disease, which was asymptomatic and was never discovered. Dr Grenville says that, because of her past history of coronary thrombosis, Mrs Leigh was at high risk of sudden death from heart attack. Dr Grenville noted that Mrs Leigh had some history of raised blood pressure. In the 1980s, readings as high as 170/110 were seen on occasion. However, Mrs Leigh was prescribed atenenol with beneficial effect. In the 1990s, her blood pressure was rarely above 150/90. However, in January 1996 it was 170/90 and in April 1996 it was 170/80. Dr Grenville says that, by this time, Mrs Leigh had underlying hypertension which increased her risk of dying suddenly either from a heart attack or stroke.
Dr Grenville also noted that, as long ago as 1971, Mrs Leigh had been found to have a raised cholesterol level. She was advised about her diet but it appears that this problem was not adequately followed up. No further measurements appear in the records. As Mrs Leigh was not Shipman's patient until 1994, this omission was not his responsibility. Dr Grenville says it is likely that Mrs Leigh's cholesterol level had been high for many years and this would expose her to a further risk of heart attack and stroke.
Mrs Leigh's losses of consciousness persisted and, in 1994, Mrs Leigh was fitted with a pacemaker. The blackouts ceased but she continued to experience periods of light-headedness and dizziness. In December 1995, Shipman referred her to a vascular surgeon, Mr M G Walker, at Manchester Royal Infirmary, for investigation of her light-headedness. Mr Walker saw her on 16th
January 1996 and arranged a carotid duplex scan. On 26th
January 1996, there is a letter reporting the result of the carotid duplex scan, which had shown only minimal disease of the internal carotid but severe disease of both carotid arteries. Mr Walker did not think that the arteries were causing the fainting attacks.
On 27th
February 1996, Shipman referred Mrs Leigh to Dr Derek Rowlands at Manchester Royal Infirmary for a cardiological opinion. In early April, Dr Rowlands reported that he thought Mrs Leigh's periods of light-headedness were probably due to
'vaso-depressor syncope'
. He rejected the possibility that the syncope had a cardiac cause. He referred her to Professor David Neary, a consultant neurologist, and a colleague, Dr Adam Fitzpatrick, who had a particular interest in vaso-depressor syncope syndrome. In May, she was seen in Dr Fitzpatrick's clinic, where tests were planned to ascertain whether the light-headedness was due to hypotension. On 11th
June 1996, there is a record of a cervical spine x-ray report from Professor Neary's clinic, which showed evidence of significant cervical spondylosis. This provided an explanation for the light-headedness, which was now thought to be due to vertebro-basilar insufficiency. This condition is caused by the loss of flexibility in the arteries as they come through the neck alongside the spine. As the head is moved, the arteries need to bend and flex. In old age, they can become stiff, and when the head and neck are moved, the arteries can become temporarily blocked, leading to dizziness, nausea, incoordination or even a transient ischaemic attack. These attacks are not life threatening, although they can be very unpleasant. As Mrs Leigh also had cervical spondylosis, this would make matters worse. Dr Grenville thought this diagnosis was an entirely plausible explanation for Mrs Leigh's light-headedness. Mrs Leigh was discharged from consultant care. While these various investigations had been going on, Mrs Leigh had had an episode of back pain and had visited Shipman for other routine matters, such as a cervical smear.
The next entry in the computerised record before Mrs Leigh's death is dated 11th
July 1996 and reads:
'Had a chat to patient
re tests and referal
(
sic
)
'
.
There is no indication of where this chat took place and no appointment for that day is recorded in the surgery records or in Mrs Leigh's personal diary. The date and time at which the entry was made cannot be checked because it precedes the installation of the audit trail. In the light of subsequent events, some suspicion must arise as to whether there was indeed a consultation on this day.
Despite her extensive medical history, Mrs Leigh's family says that she was reasonably well. She led an independent life and continued to drive her own car. She had many friends and an active social life with regular outings and holidays away with friends and family. She did her own housework and shopping, probably with the assistance of a home help for heavy chores. When her friend, Mrs Wilde, became ill, Mrs Leigh did her shopping as well as her own. The family had no reason to be particularly concerned about Mrs Leigh's health in the period immediately before her death. It was not only the family who thought Mrs Leigh was in reasonable health. In his letter of 3rd
April 1996, Dr Rowlands had said:
'Basically, of course, despite all her many medical problems over the years and her complex medical and surgical history, she currently is fit and well apart from episodes of light headedness and near syncope which continue to occur despite a satisfactorily functioning cardiac pacemaker...'
.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
On Saturday, 13th
July 1996, Mrs Leigh spent the evening with Mrs Wilde. Mrs Wilde's son, John, was also present. Mrs Wilde has since died.
On Sunday, 14th
July, another friend, Mrs Palmer, spoke to Mrs Leigh by telephone and she seemed well. Mr and Mrs Stafford came to see her during the evening of that day when she appeared well. She arranged to meet them at a garden party on the Tuesday afternoon.
On Monday, 15th
July, Ms Yarwood, a neighbour of Mrs Leigh who lived not far away, saw and spoke to Mrs Leigh. Mrs Leigh said that she was not very well and was feeling really tired. Ms Yarwood recalls that, although Mrs Leigh looked tired, she did not look ill.
The Day of the Death
On Tuesday, 16th
July 1996, Mr Warrender spoke to Mrs Leigh over the garden fence. They exchanged a few pleasantries. At about 11.30am, Mr Stafford telephoned Mrs Leigh about a tool that he had left at her house on his previous visit. She promised to bring it with her to the garden party that afternoon. He said that she was her 'normal lively self' during this conversation.
None of her family or friends was aware of an impending doctor's visit on that day and there is no entry in the practice records to suggest that such a visit was contemplated. Nor does Mrs Leigh's diary contain any relevant entry.
The telephone billing records for the day show no telephone calls made by Mrs Leigh during the day, the first itemised calls from her house being made at 6.23pm, after her death was discovered.
Mrs Leigh did not appear at the garden party, which started at about 2.30pm. Mr Stafford and another friend, Mr Gee, were concerned and went to her house, where Mr Stafford knocked on the door. There was no reply and they returned to the garden party where they told Mrs Wilde the result of their visit. Upon her return home, Mrs Wilde tried to telephone Mrs Leigh. When there was no reply she became concerned, so her son, John, drove her round to Mrs Leigh's home. She went into the house using a key which she kept and found Mrs Leigh sitting upright in an armchair, fully dressed, looking very peaceful. But she was dead.
Mr Wilde joined his mother in the house and they called an ambulance. That call is timed at 6.02pm. The paramedics attended at 6.14pm and confirmed the fact of death at 6.20pm. They noted:
'Patient has some rigor present, she has past history of heart condition.
Pace maker fitted'
.
Shipman was called at 6.35pm. The paramedics spoke to Mrs Shipman who told them that her husband would attend, most likely within the hour. Meanwhile, since there were no relatives on the scene, the police were notified, at 6.40pm. The message received by them was:
'SUDDEN DEATH FEMALE 81 YRS CARRIE LEE GP WILL ATTEND BUT MAY BE SOME TIME, AMBULANCE CREW AT SCENE, AMBULANCE CREW BELIEVE THAT RELATIVES (IF ANY EXIST) ARE UNAWARE'
.
The paramedics laid Mrs Leigh out on the settee. Shipman arrived and observed in the presence of Mrs Wilde and her son that it was 'very considerate' of Mrs Leigh to have died lying down. By that time, Mr Richard Wilde, Mr John Wilde's brother, had also appeared on the scene. None of Mrs Leigh's family was able to reach the house that night and Mrs Leigh's body was removed to the undertakers. Mrs Wilde informed Professor Palmer's daughter of the death.
The Aftermath
The day after the death, Professor Palmer went to see Shipman with her daughter, Emma, who was training to be a doctor. Shipman told them that Mrs Leigh had died as the result of a heart attack. He said that he had told Mrs Leigh that she might die very suddenly at any time as the result of one of her blackouts. His manner was objective and unsympathetic. Dr Grenville noted the apparent inconsistency between what Shipman said to Professor Palmer and her daughter and the results of the specialist investigations carried out into Mrs Leigh's fainting attacks. Mr Walker had ruled out a vascular cause, and Dr Rowlands had ruled out a cardiac cause. Shipman had not expressed any disagreement with the diagnosis of vertebro-basilar insufficiency.
Professor Palmer asked Shipman about the need for a post-mortem examination. She was aware of the need for such an examination in some cases of sudden death. Her father had died suddenly and there had been a post-mortem examination of his body. She would not have been greatly distressed if one had been needed after her mother's death. However, Shipman said this would not be necessary as he had seen Mrs Leigh within the last 14 days.
Shipman handed Professor Palmer the completed Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD).
Certification
In the MCCD, Shipman claimed to have last seen Mrs Leigh on 11th
July 1996 although, as I have said, there is some doubt as to whether he had in fact seen her on that day. The last consultation recorded in the practice records was on 31st May, about six weeks before the death. If Shipman had given that as the last date on which he had seen Mrs Leigh alive, the certificate might have been rejected by the registrar and the death referred to the coroner.
The cause of death was given as coronary thrombosis with an interval of seconds between onset and death. The coronary thrombosis was said to be due to ischaemic heart disease, which had been present for 12 years and hypertension lasting 11 years. Shipman cited high cholesterol levels over a period of 25 years as being another significant condition contributing to the death.
On Form B of the cremation certificate, Shipman stated the time of death as
'About 1530 hours'
. In fact, Mrs Leigh's failure to attend the garden party as expected makes it likely that her death occurred by 2.30pm at the latest.
Shipman claimed to have attended Mrs Leigh for six months during her 'last illness'. Mrs Leigh had not had a 'last illness'. During the last six months of her life, she had been undergoing investigations for a condition which had been present for a long time and which had not worsened in any way during that time. In any event, it could not properly be said that the investigations of the last six months were connected to a heart attack. Only a short time before Mrs Leigh's death, Dr Rowlands had ruled out a cardiac cause for the condition for which she was being investigated. Shipman repeated his claim that he had last seen Mrs Leigh alive on 11th
July 1996.
Shipman claimed that the mode of death was
'Syncope'
lasting
'seconds'
. He further stated that Mrs Leigh was:
'found by neighbour.
Ambulance people confirmed death
just before I arrived'
.
He stated that no one was present at the moment of death, so his description of the mode of death must have been intended as supposition.
Shipman's Movements on the Day of Death
There is no direct evidence of Shipman's presence at Mrs Leigh's house on the day of her death and prior thereto. There is no evidence of an intended visit in the practice records. An entry does appear in the duty doctor book but this is likely to relate to the visit after Mrs Leigh's death, which would have occurred out of normal surgery hours. It seems that Mrs Leigh's death must have occurred between about 11.30am and 2.30pm, when she failed to appear at the garden party.
The appointments sheet shows that Shipman had the usual morning surgery followed by an open surgery attended by only four patients. The antenatal clinic started at midday, although two patients were booked in early. Shipman and the midwife usually shared the antenatal clinic, although Shipman usually stayed until it was over; nine patients attended on this day. It is likely therefore to have finished no earlier than about 1pm. There was a 'first booking' antenatal clinic at 2pm but this would be conducted by the midwife and, in any event, no patients appear to have attended. Afternoon surgery began at 4pm. Shipman is, therefore, likely to have gone out on his visits between 1pm and 4pm. The visits book records two visits.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville, who has examined all Mrs Leigh's available medical records, says that, in the light of her history, she was at risk of a sudden death from a heart attack. He said that the vertebro-basilar insufficiency, which Professor Neary believed was the cause of Mrs Leigh's light-headedness, is not a fatal condition.
Dr Grenville was aware of the description of Mrs Leigh's position and appearance in death. He observed that her sitting position in an armchair and her peaceful appearance are not what are usually seen after a death from heart attack, stroke or any other common form of sudden natural death. He concludes that it was not likely that Mrs Leigh met a natural death. On the other hand, her peaceful appearance was entirely typical of that of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of diamorphine.
Shipman claimed that he had last seen Mrs Leigh on 11th
July 1996, only five days before her death. Dr Grenville says that, if Mrs Leigh had then complained to him of chest pain on exertion or shortness of breath, it would have been reasonable for him to certify her sudden death as being due to heart attack. However, if Shipman did not see Mrs Leigh on 11th
July, or if he did see her then but she did not complain of cardiac problems, he should not have signed the MCCD, as he could not have known the cause of death.
Shipman also stated that the death occurred at 3.30pm. Dr Grenville says that it would not be possible for a doctor in Shipman's supposed position to know the time of death. He could not have made an honest assessment of the time of death based on the information legitimately available to him.
Dr Grenville concludes that, on the medical evidence, it is more likely that Mrs Leigh died as the result of an overdose of opiate than that she died of natural causes.
Professor Richard Baker considered the cremation documents and came to the view that Mrs Leigh's death was highly suspicious. He also looked at her medical records and considered, from those, that her death was moderately suspicious.
Conclusion
Mrs Leigh's death was very sudden. She had been well for some time before her death and her only recent complaints had been related to non-fatal conditions. In particular, she had not complained of chest pain or breathlessness on exertion. This, coupled with her appearance in death, shows, as Dr Grenville observed, that a heart attack was probably not the cause of her sudden death. That is so, even though Mrs Leigh might well have died of a heart attack at any time.
There is no direct evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Leigh on the day of her death. However, there is evidence from which I could infer that he probably did. This is the evidence that he appears to have something to hide in respect of Mrs Leigh's death. He told a number of lies on the MCCD and Form B, which I detail below.
First, I have come to the conclusion that Shipman almost certainly lied when he said that he had last seen Mrs Leigh alive on 11th
July, five days before her death. I do not think he did see her, first, because there is no confirmation in any surgery record of either a surgery appointment or a home visit and, second, Shipman's note of the supposed consultation does not make sense. It is not about any medical condition or social problem or any form of routine monitoring. I think it is highly likely that Shipman has fabricated a record of a consultation in order to give the impression that he had seen Mrs Leigh within 14 days before her death and also to give the impression that she had some form of illness which required a referral. In fact she did not. She had no 'last illness' at all and Shipman could not properly and should not have signed her MCCD. If Shipman had admitted that he had not seen Mrs Leigh since 31st
May, the last properly recorded and confirmed consultation before her death, the registrar would probably have referred the death to the coroner. Shipman sometimes falsely claimed to have seen a patient within 14 days before death in cases where it is clear he had not killed the patient. It appears he might have done so in order to save the family the added worry of a post-mortem examination. This does not appear likely in this case. Shipman might have had other, more sinister motives. He told this lie on many occasions where he had killed the patient. The effect would be to reduce the risk that the death might be referred to the coroner.
Dr Grenville says that, if he had read Form B, in his capacity as a doctor about to sign Form C or as a medical referee considering whether or not to authorise cremation, he would have gathered the impression that Shipman had been treating Mrs Leigh for ischaemic heart disease for the past six months. That, he says, is the implication behind Shipman's statement. I am satisfied that that was deliberately misleading. If Shipman had admitted that Mrs Leigh had not suffered any 'last illness', the death would have been referred to the coroner. There would then have been a danger that the pathologist would not have found anything to explain the death and this might have resulted in toxicological tests on body tissues.
Shipman also stated that the death occurred at about 3.30pm, when he could not possibly have known what time Mrs Leigh died, unless he was with her at the time. If he had nothing to hide, one would have expected him to say that he could not tell at what time she had died and to give the bracket of times between which the death must have occurred. In my view, Shipman probably wished to specify a time of death which was almost certainly well after the true time. If anyone had seen him visiting Mrs Leigh in the early afternoon, it would then appear that she had been alive for some time after his visit.
Shipman's statements on the certification and cremation documents give rise to a strong suspicion that he had something to hide in respect of Mrs Leigh's death.
Drawing these factors together, I have come to the conclusion that Shipman probably killed Mrs Leigh in the early afternoon of 16th
July 1996. The evidence is not sufficiently clear for me to say that I am sure of that conclusion but I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001