The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Florence Lewis
Introduction
Mrs Florence Lewis was found dead at her home, 41 Mansfield Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 11th
November 1997 at the age of 79. Mrs Lewis' death is recorded in the register of deaths as having occurred on Monday, 10th
November 1997 and I have concluded, from the evidence available to this Inquiry, that that is when she died. She had been a patient of Shipman since May 1996 and thought highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident caused by arteriosclerosis.
In August 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, one of Mrs Lewis' former neighbours, Mr Mervyn Graham, contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances of Mrs Lewis' death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Graham, Mr Brian John Lewis (Mrs Lewis' son), Mrs Patricia Mary Hartley (her daughter), Mr John Windebank (her brother), Mrs Florence Windebank (her sister-in-law), Mr Terry Atkins, Mrs Lynn Susan Atkins and Mr Desmond Dollard (her neighbours), Mr Malcolm Peacock (a paramedic) and PC Susan Callaghan. The police also obtained a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Lewis but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Lewis, Mrs Hartley, Mr Windebank, Mr Graham, Mrs Atkins, Mr Dollard and PC Callaghan. Mr Lewis gave oral evidence at a hearing on 10th
October 2001, and Mr Graham and PC Callaghan on 15th
October 2001. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Lewis' general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
Personal Background
Mrs Lewis was a widow and had lived alone following the death of her husband in 1992. She had a hysterectomy in 1964 and an appendicectomy in 1965. Her medical records disclose that she had had problems with her feet and had undergone surgery, which appears to have been successful. She also suffered from dyspepsia associated with gastro-oesophageal reflux. She had asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, which were reasonably well controlled by the use of inhalers and for which she was monitored regularly by the practice nurse. She had suffered from high blood pressure since the 1980s. At times this was difficult to control but it had stabilised by February 1997.
Mrs Lewis transferred to Shipman's practice in May 1996, having been impressed by his treatment of one of her friends. In late 1996 and again in early 1997, Mrs Lewis suffered an episode of transient loss of vision in the eye as a result of a condition known as amaurosis fugax, which can be a precursor to a stroke. She had had similar episodes in 1990. In March 1997, Shipman referred Mrs Lewis to Mr A B Woodyer, a vascular surgeon at Tameside General Hospital, for investigation of the problem. She underwent a carotid duplex scan, which showed atheroma in both carotid arteries but no significant narrowing.
In June 1997, Mrs Lewis was seen at home with sciatica and in the surgery for vertigo. By 18th
June, the vertigo was better and Shipman referred Mrs Lewis for physiotherapy for her sciatica. The record for that day is the last manuscript record before her death. Thereafter, her medical progress can be traced in the computerised notes. In a note dated 21st
July, she is recorded as having attended the surgery and the note reads:
'Diplopia...each eye split vision 150/80 TIA'
.
TIA means 'transient ischaemic attack'.
Mrs Lewis' blood pressure was not unduly high on 30th
July when she attended for hypertension monitoring. Thereafter, she had a pneumococcal vaccination and the letter from Mr Woodyer giving the result of the carotid scan was noted.
Despite her medical problems, her family and neighbours describe Mrs Lewis as an active woman who looked after herself and her house without assistance. She caught the bus into Hyde town centre frequently and took a taxi to regular bingo sessions. Mr Lewis saw his mother about once a week. He never had any serious concern about her health, but he was aware that she suffered from asthma and raised blood pressure. He knew that his mother had been worried when she was referred to Mr Woodyer. He understood that the effect of the result of the scan was to give his mother a clean bill of health. Mr Lewis knew that his mother held Shipman in high regard. She had been extremely pleased when she had been accepted onto his list in 1996. The family was aware that, since her transfer, Shipman had made a number of unannounced home visits to Mrs Lewis.
The Events Leading up to Death
The computerised records show that Mrs Lewis attended the surgery on 5th
November 1997 for an appointment in the blood pressure clinic run by the practice nurse, Sister Gillian Morgan. The appointment was for 11am and the audit trail carried out by Detective Sergeant Ashley shows that the note
'O/E - blood pressure reading...140 110'
was made just after 11.20am on that date. It seems highly likely that Sister Morgan herself made that note. Bendrofluazide, a diuretic sometimes used to treat hypertension, was prescribed for the first time on that day. A note relating to that prescription, in Shipman's hand, has been found within the records. It is likely that, on discovering that the blood pressure was raised, the practice nurse consulted Shipman, who made a manuscript note of the additional medication to be prescribed. Shipman signed the prescription. He may even have seen Mrs Lewis whilst she was at the surgery. His open surgery, which was due to start at 10.15am, had only six patients and it is possible that he saw her after he had finished. Certainly, her sister-in-law, Mrs Windebank, understood from her that she had had some conversation with her doctor, after which he had prescribed 'water tablets' for her. The computerised record made on 5th
November is the last record made prior to Mrs Lewis' death.
On Friday, 7th
November, Mr Lewis visited his mother on his way home from work, and she seemed all right. On Sunday, 9th
November, Mr and Mrs Windebank went to Mrs Lewis' home for tea. That was the occasion when Mrs Windebank had the conversation to which I have already referred. Mr and Mrs Windebank were not concerned about Mrs Lewis' health when they left her between 11pm and midnight.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of Monday, 10th
November, Mrs Hartley called to see her mother and stayed until early afternoon. Mrs Lewis seemed well and did not mention that she expected the doctor to call. After she left, Mrs Hartley had no further contact with her mother.
No request for a visit on that date is recorded in the surgery documents. Nor does Shipman appear to have indicated an intention to visit Mrs Lewis by making an entry in the visits book.
Mrs Lewis' neighbour, Mr Graham, used to keep a watchful eye on her. When he spoke to the police in August 1998, after expressing his concern about Mrs Lewis' death, he described events which he believed had occurred on a day in September or October 1997. He said he had seen a man come out of Mrs Lewis' house and get into a red 'people carrier' which had been parked outside the house for about half an hour. The man then drove off slowly, peering into Mrs Lewis' front window as he went. Although Mr Graham had seen Mrs Lewis in the front garden before the visitor called, he did not see her for the rest of the day. He has now expanded on his previous account in his Inquiry statement, by giving a more detailed account of what he saw of the man, who was clearly Shipman. He says that when Shipman arrived, Mrs Lewis was cutting roses in her front garden. The two went into the house together. Mr Graham was working on his car. About half an hour later, Shipman came out, but Mrs Lewis was not in sight. This was unusual, as she usually showed her visitors out. Mr Graham noticed that Shipman backed up his vehicle some yards and peered into Mrs Lewis' front room before driving off.
That same night, Mr Graham noticed that Mrs Lewis' curtains remained open and the electric fire was switched on much later than was usual. Mrs Lewis was something of a creature of habit and he was a little concerned.
The appointments sheet for 10th
November shows that Shipman had his usual morning surgery followed by the open surgery starting at 10.15am. Fifteen patients attended open surgery so it is likely that the surgery would have lasted until at least noon, and afterwards it was Shipman's habit to do paperwork. He had his usual afternoon surgery starting at 4pm. The visits book discloses four visits to be made. The locations of the premises to be visited are dotted about all over Hyde.
The Discovery of the Death
On the morning of 11th
November, Mr Graham was still worried about Mrs Lewis and went to her house, where he found the curtains still open. He looked through the front window and saw Mrs Lewis slumped in an armchair in her front room, not moving. He went to the house of Mrs Atkins and she went and looked through Mrs Lewis' window. She then went to a third neighbour, Mr Dollard, who had a key to Mrs Lewis' house. Mr Dollard went into the house and confirmed that Mrs Lewis was dead.
At 8.14am, Mr Atkins called an ambulance. The paramedics attended and confirmed that Mrs Lewis was dead at 8.30am. On their form, they commented:
'Rigor mortis present
Entry gained by neighbours key
Unable to get reply from son/daughters telephone
GP unknown'
.
The paramedics summoned the police at 8.35am. The message received by the police was:
'SUDDEN DEATH - FLORENCE LEWIS 80 YRS UNABLE TO INFORM THE RELATIVES AS NO REPLY. AMBULANCE ARE IN ATTENDANCE HAVE NO DOCTORS DETAILS PARAMEDICS HAVE PRONOUNCED LIFE EXTINCT'
.
In response to the call by the ambulance service, PC Susan Callaghan attended at 9.04am with a probationary officer. She spoke to the paramedics and to a neighbour, presumably Mr Dollard. She eventually managed to make contact with Mrs Hartley, who came to the house. Mrs Hartley was struck by her mother's peaceful appearance. Her husband, Mr Frederick Hartley, contacted Mr Lewis. He saw his mother sitting in her chair looking very relaxed and peaceful. He described her as 'serene'.
There is a slight conflict of evidence as to whether Shipman attended that morning. Mr Graham was going out for the day and was not directly involved in events after he had drawn attention to Mrs Lewis' death. He noticed various people coming and going to and from the house and says that he saw Shipman arrive at some stage. All other witnesses say that Shipman did not attend. PC Callaghan cannot remember whether an emergency doctor attended, or indeed if Shipman did, although she thinks not. In November 1997, it was not necessary for a doctor to attend to certify the fact of death if a paramedic had done so. The police incident report contains no mention of a visit by a doctor. An on-call undertaker was contacted and Mrs Lewis' body removed to the mortuary at Tameside General Hospital. The family says that Shipman did not attend the house. It is possible that Mr Graham's recollection of seeing Shipman that morning is in error. If Shipman had come to the house and had been prepared to certify the cause of death, it is difficult to see why it would have been necessary to remove Mrs Lewis' body to the hospital mortuary, rather than the funeral directors' premises. A telephone call was made from Mrs Lewis' house to Shipman's surgery at 10.34am. Mr Hartley has a vague recollection that he made a call that morning in connection with the arrangements for collecting a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). I think that that call prompted Shipman to telephone the coroner's office to say that he would be prepared to certify the cause of death.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD on 11th
November, stating that the death had occurred on 10th
November. He said that he had seen Mrs Lewis' body after death. It is possible that he went to the hospital mortuary to view the body. This cannot be checked, as the mortuary staff do not keep records. However, this assertion is at variance with a later statement made on Form B of the cremation certificate, where Shipman claimed to have seen the body 48 hours after the death, which would have been on 12th
November, the day after he signed the MCCD. On the MCCD, Shipman also claimed that he had last seen Mrs Lewis alive on 5th
November 1997 which, as I have explained, is a possibility despite the fact she had no appointment with him.
He stated that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident caused by arteriosclerosis, the onset of which had been two to three years before death. Another significant condition contributing to the death was said to be hypertension with an onset 18 months (changed from 12) before death.
Form B of the cremation certificate is dated 12th
November 1997. The time of death is stated to be
'In the late evening of 10 11 97'
. Shipman claimed to have attended Mrs Lewis for six months during her 'last illness' and repeated that he had last seen her alive on 5th
November 1997, five days before her death.
He further stated that he had seen her body 48 hours after her death. As I have pointed out, this is inconsistent with his statement made on 11th
November, that he had by that time already seen the body. There is a note in the visits book dated 12th
November 1997, which reads:
'Florrance
(
sic
)
Lewis at Raymond Massey Dukinfield, re crem'
.
This suggests that Shipman was to go to the funeral directors' premises to see Mrs Lewis' body before completing Form B. He would not have had to go there if he had seen her body previously. Given the inconsistency between the documents, it must be a real possibility that, in this instance, Shipman completed the MCCD without having seen Mrs Lewis' body after her death. There was no obligation on him to see the body before signing the MCCD, but he should not have said he had seen it, if he had not.
On Form B, Shipman stated that the mode of death was
'Collapse'
lasting
'seconds'
. Shipman further stated that Mrs Lewis was
'found by son late 10.11.97 999 confirmed dead by paramedics'
. This, of course, is a wholly inaccurate account of the circumstances and, if innocently given, it is difficult to know from where Shipman could have got it. There is no evidence that he spoke to any of the family or the neighbours about the circumstances of Mrs Lewis' death. Shipman also stated that no one was present at the death.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville noted that Mrs Lewis' appearance in death was not typical of what is usually seen following a sudden cerebrovascular death. He also observed that Shipman could not possibly have been in a position properly to certify the cause of death. If it was true that he had last seen Mrs Lewis on 5th
November, there was nothing in her records at that time which would have enabled him honestly to conclude that a sudden death five days later was due to a stroke. The death should have been referred to the coroner.
Professor Richard Baker found the death moderately suspicious on the basis of the information contained in the medical records and highly suspicious on the basis of the information in Form B.
Conclusion
The circumstances of this death are very highly suspicious. I am quite satisfied that the man in the red 'people carrier' seen by Mr Graham outside Mrs Lewis' house in the early afternoon of 10th
November was Shipman. When he arrived, she was working in her garden. Mrs Lewis was found dead the next morning. No one saw her or spoke to her after Shipman's visit. That factor is highly suspicious in itself.
Mrs Lewis' death was wholly unexpected. She had been in reasonably good health. Her raised blood pressure, atheroma of the carotid arteries and past history of transient ischaemic attacks put her at an increased risk of suffering a cerebrovascular accident. A sudden death from that cause was, therefore, possible. Other factors point away from this being a death due to a massive stroke. Mrs Lewis' appearance in death was not typical of that seen following a massive fatal stroke. It was entirely typical of that seen in many of Shipman's victims. It would have been an extraordinary coincidence that a sudden death from natural causes should have taken place so soon after Shipman's visit.
Shipman made false entries on the MCCD and on Form B. First, and most important, he concealed the fact that he had seen Mrs Lewis on the day of her death. He also failed to make any note of that visit in the medical records. I can only conclude that this was a dishonest concealment. He also sought to suggest that Mrs Lewis had been found by her son late in the evening of 10th
November. He does not say that she was found dead. As he suggested that the death had occurred in the late evening, it seems that he might have been seeking to suggest that the son was present at the death. However, he does not state that in specific terms. He does give the impression that the son and paramedics were able to tell him something about the cause and mode of death. That is wholly misleading.
Shipman claimed to be able to certify the cause of death at a time when he had not apparently seen the body. If this was a natural death, it was sudden and unexpected and its cause could not have been adequately established without a post-mortem examination. Shipman's failure to refer this death to the coroner is suspicious.
Taking all these matters into account, I am left in no doubt at all that Shipman killed Mrs Lewis during his visit on the afternoon of 10th
November. The mode of killing was almost certainly his usual method, a lethal injection of diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001