The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
May Lowe
Introduction
Miss May Lowe died at her home, 13 Allen Avenue, Hyde on Maundy Thursday, 27th
March 1997 at the age of 84. She lived alone and had never married. She had been a patient of Shipman for many years and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
In November 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mr Ian Andrew, the husband of Miss Lowe's niece, Mrs Gillian Andrew, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of Miss Lowe's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Andrew, Mrs Diane Gleaves (Mrs Andrew's sister, another niece), Mrs Jean Outram (a former neighbour of Miss Lowe) and Dr Alan Banks (the Assistant Director of Primary Care with the West Pennine Health Authority). Detective Sergeant Ashley carried out an analysis of the computerised entries in the medical records.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Miss Lowe but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mrs Andrew, Mrs Gleaves and Mrs Outram. The Inquiry has also had access to Miss Lowe's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits book, Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and cremation documentation. The Inquiry has obtained Miss Lowe's telephone billing records for the day of her death. Dr John Grenville has provided a medical report.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Gleaves says that her aunt was a very proud and independent woman. Despite her age, she was very active and she used to walk into Hyde town centre, a distance of about a mile, twice a week to pick up her pension and do her shopping.
Miss Lowe used to stay with Mrs Andrew and her family most weekends, and Mrs Andrew used to visit her aunt at home each Tuesday. Mrs Andrew says that Miss Lowe had a number of health problems. She had arthritis and was rather deaf. Mrs Andrew recalls that, until about 12 months before her death, Miss Lowe was taking tablets for a heart condition, water retention and circulation problems. There was then an adjustment in her medication, following which her health deteriorated and she suffered palpitations, fainting spells and a substantial loss of energy. Dr Grenville was unable to identify this episode from the records but a computerised entry for 28th
March 1996 suggests that the anti-arthritis tablets, Reliflex, were stopped due to unspecified side effects.
In the distant past, Miss Lowe had had cancer on the left side of her face, for which she underwent an operation. This left her with a prominent scar which caused her some embarrassment. Mrs Andrew recalls that her aunt's cancer returned in 1985. A letter from Manchester Royal Infirmary, dated June 14th
1950, reveals that Miss Lowe had a mixed parotid tumour surgically excised. Correspondence from the Christie Hospital, dated 27th
November 1986, confirms that there was a multi-nodular recurrence of this tumour in 1986. On 15th
January 1987, the tumour was surgically excised. It appears that Miss Lowe made a good recovery, with no suggestion of spread of the cancer, although she underwent cosmetic revision surgery in 1989.
Mrs Andrew recalls that her aunt attended a heart clinic at Shipman's surgery once a month for the three or four months before she died. Mrs Gleaves recalls that her aunt had been attending this clinic either once a month or once every three months (she cannot now remember which) for about two or three years prior to her death.
The handwritten medical records broadly support the witness evidence. They show problems with rheumatoid arthritis, and prescriptions for a diuretic (Diurexan) and Innovace, which is a form of treatment for heart failure.
Correspondence from Tameside General Hospital, dated 24th
April 1989, records that Miss Lowe was complaining of a lack of energy and depression. She also reported pain across her lower chest, of unpredictable onset, lasting for a few minutes. Such pain might well suggest a heart-related problem. She was reported then to be on medication for her rheumatic illness and for angina.
In April 1992, Shipman documented an episode of congestive heart failure, in which Miss Lowe's jugular venous pressure was raised, she had ankle oedema and he heard a gallop rhythm when listening to her heart. Shipman instituted treatment for heart failure and it appears that Miss Lowe was reviewed for heart failure on a regular basis at Shipman's practice until her death. There are further entries in the computerised records relating to this condition in 1994, 1995, 1996 and 1997. A reference to intermittent claudication in October 1995 corresponds with the family's recollection that there were problems with circulation in the lower limbs. Dr Grenville says that the records show that, on one or two occasions, Miss Lowe showed signs suggestive of possible very mild cardiac failure but the vast majority of the records show no signs of active heart failure. There are several blood pressure recordings and there is no evidence that Miss Lowe was significantly hypertensive.
The latest entry in Miss Lowe's handwritten general practitioner records was made by a locum doctor on Monday, 12th
August 1996. It records a history of dizziness and nausea. Miss Lowe had apparently fainted that morning. The doctor diagnosed dizziness and prescribed Stemetil, which is a form of treatment for nausea.
The Period Leading up to the Death
According to Mrs Andrew, Miss Lowe was quite ill with influenza in January 1997. In the last few weeks of her life, she seemed very tired and spent a lot of time in bed.
A visit request is recorded in the visits book for 20th
February 1997 which reads:
'May Lowe 13 Allen Ave Hyde 366 8053 - flu bug fainted last
night. Sleeped
(
sic
)
OK feels poorly Had 3days - per relative'
.
It is likely that this is related to the illness described by Mrs Andrew. The computerised records for 20th
February 1997 contain the code
'CVA unspecified'
and the following text:
'fall last night has the flu amoxil phol see morne'
.
Amoxil is an antibiotic and, according to Dr Grenville,
'phol'
probably stands for pholcodine, a cough medicine. There is nothing in Shipman's note to justify his diagnosis of a cerebrovascular accident and, if this illness is the one referred to by Mrs Gleaves and Mrs Andrew, there is nothing in their descriptions to suggest that Miss Lowe had had a stroke. An audit trail, carried out by the Inquiry on the surgery computer, demonstrates that this entry was created at 3.39pm on the same day as the visit.
Miss Lowe's name appears in the visits book for 21st
February 1997 as a revisit. There is nothing in the records to show that this revisit took place.
On Tuesday, 25th
March 1997, two days before the death, Mrs Andrew took her two young sons to visit Miss Lowe. They all stayed for dinner. Miss Lowe reported that she had fainted earlier that day and had found herself on the floor when she came round. Mrs Andrew insisted that her aunt should call Shipman out to see her about this but she is not sure whether her aunt actually made the call. Mrs Andrew now recalls that her aunt seemed well despite this episode, but she told the police that her aunt was low in mood and that she was just recovering from influenza. Mrs Andrew told the police that she telephoned her aunt the following day, 26th
March, when her aunt said that her condition was the same. In her statement to the Inquiry, Mrs Andrew was unable to recall having spoken to her aunt on the day before she died.
The surgery documents contain no record of any visit or visit request after 25th
March 1997 or indeed at all after the 'revisit' on 21st
February. Nor is there any record in the appointments sheets that Miss Lowe attended the surgery during that period.
The Day of the Death
There is no eyewitness evidence that Shipman visited Miss Lowe on 27th
March 1997, so the time of his visit is not known. Shipman began his morning surgery at 8.30am and, having seen the ten patients who attended for open surgery, would have been free to go on his rounds from about midday. His visits book shows that he had three people to visit and the third person mentioned, Mrs Fish, now deceased, lived in Laurel Bank Nursing Home, Knott Lane, which is quite close, perhaps half a mile, to Miss Lowe's home.
There is an entry in Miss Lowe's computerised medical records for 27th
March which notes that Miss Lowe had been seen in her own home and that the diagnosis was of a transient ischaemic attack, which is a slight stroke, from which the patient had made a full recovery. The computer audit trail reveals that this entry was made at 3.32pm on 27th
March 1997. The comment section on the single history sheet records the following:
'? l cva had episode in street tluk'
.
This entry suggests that Shipman thought that Miss Lowe might have had a left-sided stroke. She had supposedly reported an episode in the street and was to let Shipman know, presumably, if she had any further problems. That entry was made at 3.32pm. It would appear that Shipman had probably completed his rounds and had returned to the surgery by 3.30pm. He would then do administrative work before afternoon surgery which was due to begin at 3.50pm. There is no evidence to corroborate or refute this suggested episode in the street, which might have been a cerebrovascular accident.
Shipman then saw patients from about 3.50pm until the conclusion of afternoon open surgery at or about 5.45pm. It would seem that he had a meeting of the Small Practitioners' Association at 7pm.
Mrs Gleaves telephoned her aunt at about 7.30pm. There was no reply so she went to her aunt's house and arrived at about 7.50pm. She recalls that the house was in darkness. Through the sitting room window she could see that the gas fire was on. She tried to open the front door but, although it was unlocked, the security chain was on. This was in accordance with Miss Lowe's usual practice because she was slightly deaf and liked her visitors to call out her name before she let them in. There was no response to Mrs Gleaves' call so she went to see Mrs Outram. Mrs Outram tried to telephone Miss Lowe, with no success. Mrs Gleaves then went to the back of her aunt's property and found the back door unlocked. This was unusual because Miss Lowe usually kept her back door locked and bolted. Mrs Gleaves waited for Mrs Outram to arrive before entering the house.
When the two women entered the house, they found Miss Lowe lying on the kitchen floor. Her head was near the sink and her feet were near one of the chairs by the dining table. Mrs Gleaves noticed that there was a small pile of folded and ironed clothes on the chair by her aunt's feet. The ironing board had been set up near to the cooker and the iron, which was on top of the ironing board, was switched on. She thought that it would have been difficult for her aunt to iron anything with the ironing board in that position. She recalls thinking that it was a very unusual place for the ironing board to be and that she had never seen her aunt ironing in the kitchen. Mrs Gleaves has also told the Inquiry that it would have been very unusual for her aunt to do the ironing if she had been expecting a visit from anyone, especially her doctor.
Mrs Gleaves saw that her aunt's arms were at her sides and bent at the elbow and her left cheek was touching the floor. Her knees were slightly bent. She was wearing her normal day clothes. She looked as though she was sleeping and had a pinkish complexion. Mrs Gleaves held her aunt's right hand which felt normal and was not cold. Mrs Gleaves was unsure whether she could detect a pulse and, together with Mrs Outram, went into the lounge to use the telephone. They found that room very warm and Mrs Outram turned the fire off. It was unusual for Miss Lowe's house to be warm, as she had to be economical with heating. Mrs Gleaves told the police that she had never seen her aunt's fire on full. The fact that the fire should be on full is even more puzzling because, according to Mrs Gleaves, 27th
March 1997 was a warm day.
An ambulance crew subsequently arrived and they summoned the police and a doctor. The ambulance crew left the house shortly after the police arrived and the duty doctor, who certified the fact of death, eventually arrived at about midnight.
Miss Lowe's name does not appear in the appointments sheet for 27th
March. There is an entry in the duty doctor diary for that day which reads as follows:
'
May Lowe
D/D
not claimable
DOA
23.12/23.18'
.
The entry in the duty doctor diary relates to the visit by the on-call doctor who certified the fact of Miss Lowe's death, apparently at 11.18pm.
The billing records for Miss Lowe's telephone reveal that no call was connected to the surgery on the day of her death.
The Aftermath
Shipman made a series of computerised entries relating to the death on Tuesday, 1st
April. This would be the first working day after Maundy Thursday, 27th
March. The first entry was made at 8.03am on 1st
April 1997 and is dated 1st
April 1997, although it is clearly intended to refer to events of 27th
March 1997. It appears that Shipman failed to alter the default date when he made this entry. This type of error is easily made and Shipman frequently made it. The entry reads:
'Found dead DD on floor kitchen collapsed cva'
. 'DD' stands for deputising doctor. The second entry was made at 8.04am and is also dated 1st
April 1997. It reads:
'Telephone encounter Dr H F Shipman'
. The third entry was made at 9.03am hours on 1st
April 1997 and reads:
'Seen in GP's surgery Dr H F Shipman'
. There is no obvious explanation for these two entries. There is no evidence of a telephone encounter between Miss Lowe and Shipman or of a visit by Miss Lowe to Shipman's surgery on 27th
March and, clearly, no such incidents could have occurred on 1st
April. There is a fourth entry made at 12.58pm on that day. It reads:
'Telephone encounter O/patients informed (Sturgess)'
. This is an administrative entry recording the fact that the hospital outpatients department had been informed of Miss Lowe's death, as she had an outstanding appointment.
Mrs Andrew thinks that it was on Tuesday, 1st
April 1997, after the Easter weekend, that she saw Shipman at his surgery and collected the MCCD. She describes Shipman's manner as 'quite mellow and calm'. She recalls that he said something like:
'It was strange. I was in the area that day. What a pity. I am very sorry.'
Mrs Andrew understood Shipman to be saying that he had not actually seen her aunt on the day of her death. If her recollection is accurate, the inference she drew is probably reasonable. Shipman asked Mrs Andrew a number of times who had certified the fact of death. She said that she thought the paramedics had done this, but that she was not sure. Shipman excused himself and was away for quite a long time, perhaps 15 minutes or more. When he eventually returned, he handed an envelope to Mrs Andrew which contained the MCCD.
Certification
It appears likely that Shipman was absent from the consulting room because he was completing the MCCD and cremation Form B. On the MCCD, he stated that he had last seen Miss Lowe alive on 27th
March 1997. He said that he had also seen the body after death. He said that the death was due to a cerebrovascular accident and that congestive heart failure was a contributory cause.
Mrs Andrew made the application for cremation and stated that her aunt had died at 7pm. Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate, recording the time of death as
'1830 hrs'
. He stated that he attended Miss Lowe during her last illness for a period of two months and that he last saw her alive six hours before her death. On his timings this would have been at about 12.30pm. Shipman stated that he had made a complete external examination of the body five days after the death. The cause of death was stated as on the MCCD. The mode of death was said to be a collapse lasting seconds. When asked to what extent his views as to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or statements made by others, Shipman again did not mention a consultation on the day of the death but wrote instead:
'Niece who found her and her other niece who is making arrangements'.
As he also stated that no one had been present at the moment of death, it is hard to see how either of the two nieces could have provided any information, other than a description of the position of the body, from which Shipman could have deduced either the cause or mode of death.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville says that Miss Lowe was not at a particularly high risk of suffering a stroke, although there was some risk on account of her age.
Dr Grenville suggests that, if Shipman's record of his visit to Miss Lowe on 27th
March is genuine and that she did in fact describe an episode in the street which sounded like a minor stroke, it would have been reasonable to ascribe her subsequent death to a cerebrovascular accident. The real question is whether that note is genuine or has been fabricated to provide a plausible explanation for the death which Shipman himself had caused. Dr Grenville expresses some suspicion that the entry might not be genuine, first because his experience, like mine, is that Shipman often fabricated medical records to cover up an unlawful killing and also because there are some features of the death which are resonant of other cases in which Shipman has killed. For example, the back door was unlocked and the gas fire was on high.
Dr Grenville also mentions that if this were a natural death, which had occurred in Shipman's absence, there was no information available on which he could have estimated that the death occurred at 6.30pm.
Professor Richard Baker considered the death to be highly suspicious on the basis of the contents of the cremation certificate, and moderately suspicious on the basis of the contents of the medical records.
Dr Banks told the police that, in his opinion, Miss Lowe's recorded medical history did not support the certified cause of death.
Conclusion
There are a number of suspicious circumstances surrounding this death. First, there is good evidence that Shipman visited Miss Lowe at home on the day of her death, although Shipman himself has sought to create the impression that he did not. The good evidence of a home visit on 27th
March is that he himself made entries on the computer at 3.32pm to the effect that he had seen her at home that day and that she had given a history of an incident in the street which sounded like a stroke. The following Tuesday, he made further entries on the computer which seem to suggest that, on 27th
March, he had had a telephone conversation with Miss Lowe and had seen her in the surgery. It is, I suppose, possible that these entries related to a visit by Mrs Andrew who came to collect the MCCD. However, if they are intended to relate to contact with Miss Lowe on 27th
March, neither incident seems plausible. Miss Lowe had not been in good health and was very unlikely to have been able to go to the surgery. In any event, her name does not appear on the appointments sheet. It is possible, although unlikely, that she spoke to Shipman on the telephone. She certainly did not do so from her own home. It is possible that she did so from another telephone. If so, it must follow that she was out in the street that day and could possibly have had an episode about which she wanted to speak to or see her doctor.
Considering all these factors, I am quite satisfied that Shipman did visit Miss Lowe at home on 27th
March and made entries on the computer on his return to the surgery. He must have visited her at some time between midday and 3.15pm. Why he visited is not clear. It is possible that Miss Lowe telephoned from somewhere other than her home. It is possible that someone else telephoned on her behalf and it is quite possible that Shipman made an unsolicited call. I suspect the latter as Mrs Andrew's recollection of her conversation on 1st
April is that Shipman only admitted to having been 'in the area', as he certainly was. At that time, he was, I think, seeking to conceal the fact that he had seen Miss Lowe on the day of her death.
That Shipman should have visited Miss Lowe on the day of her death, and that her death should have been discovered shortly afterwards, gives rise to grave suspicion that Shipman was involved in the death. There is no evidence that anyone saw Miss Lowe alive or spoke to her after his visit. He subsequently sought (not very competently) to conceal the fact that he had visited that day. These factors are enough in themselves to lead me to the conclusion that Shipman probably killed Miss Lowe.
However, there are other factors to be considered.
How likely is it that Miss Lowe died of a stroke? She was unwell during January and it was thought that she had influenza. Her illness continued into February and in the middle of that month she had a fall. In the computerised records, Shipman diagnosed a cerebrovascular accident, but there were no recorded signs or symptoms to justify that diagnosis. It is possible that he was right but I am suspicious that Shipman was, at this early stage, laying the ground for Miss Lowe's sudden death.
On Shipman's account, as taken from Form B, he last saw Miss Lowe alive at 12.30pm on the day of her death. According to the note he made just after 3.30pm, she reported a transient ischaemic attack in the street. Shipman's comment
'tluk'
, meaning 'to let us know', is a familiar refrain in suspicious cases. There is nothing in the note to suggest that Miss Lowe was seriously ill. If she had been, he ought to have arranged for her admission or at least have contacted a relative. He did neither. If she was not seriously ill, her death a few hours later would have been very sudden and unexpected. Yet, he did not refer the death to the coroner. Dr Grenville says that it would have been reasonable to certify the death as due to a stroke if Miss Lowe really did describe a stroke that day. We have only Shipman's word for it that she did. If she did, it is strange that no one knew of this and mentioned it to Mrs Andrew after the death. Not even Shipman mentioned it to her when she saw him on 1st
April.
I am suspicious of Shipman's claim on Form B that the death had occurred at 6.30pm. Shipman often claimed that he could estimate the time of death with some accuracy. He often used this spurious information to distance himself and his visit from the supposed time of death. Here, he claims to have visited at 12.30pm. He might well have done. He would not wish to give too inaccurate a time, as he would not know whether or not he had been observed. But he could have had no idea of the true time of death. It may be that Mrs Andrew told him that her aunt felt warm when she was found. She might well have done, as the body had been kept quite warm. It is an odd feature of a number of cases in which Shipman has killed that the gas fire is found to be on high when the body is discovered. This gives rise to a suspicion that Shipman has turned it on or turned it up. I do not fully understand why he would do this. It might be to slow down the rate at which the body cools. It might be to speed the rate at which rigor mortis sets in. It might be to confuse any pathologist who tried to estimate the time of death. It might even be that Shipman thought that it would speed up the rate at which any opiate drug would be metabolised after death. I do not know. However, it is a common thread and it gives rise to suspicion.
That the back door of Miss Lowe's house should be unlocked causes me to suspect that Shipman used that door as his departure route.
Miss Lowe was found on the kitchen floor. Her position and appearance in death are not wholly typical of Shipman's victims, many of whom were found sitting in a chair, after being given a lethal injection of opiate. Miss Lowe's position and appearance were consistent with a natural death. However, they were not inconsistent with a death following an injection of opiate. It would have been quite possible for Shipman to inject her while she was sitting on an upright chair, which did not offer much support, and that he allowed her to fall to the floor.
My conclusion is that Shipman killed Miss Lowe. There is no significant piece of evidence which suggests that this was a natural death. I feel able to say that I am sure of this conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001