The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Joseph Leigh
Introduction
Mr Joseph Leigh died at his home, 50 King George Road, Hyde on Thursday, 16th
December 1993 at the age of 78. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Mr Leigh thought highly of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was congestive heart failure.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the available medical records and the information contained in the cremation certificate, the death of Mr Leigh was highly suspicious. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Bernice Fuggle, Mr Leigh's niece. Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Leigh. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Fuggle and Mr Kevin Anthony Farrell, Mr Leigh's nephew. The Inquiry has had access to Mr Leigh's general practitioner and hospital records, and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained two reports from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Leigh lived alone in a small three-bedroomed detached house. He was a widower and had no children. His niece, Mrs Fuggle's half-sister, Mrs Sheila Naughton, who has since died, lived on the same road, only four doors away.
Mr Leigh had a number of problems with his health. He had a left-sided stroke in May 1992, from which he made a good recovery. He suffered from congestive heart failure and oedema, caused partly by his cardiac problems and partly by venous congestion and immobility. He had advanced glaucoma and was almost completely blind.
Following his stroke, in June 1992, the occupational therapy department at Tameside General Hospital assessed Mr Leigh's care needs. A supportive regime was put in place with home helps attending at various times during the day to assist in dressing Mr Leigh and preparing meals for him. In addition, he attended the geriatric day hospital, initially on a twice-weekly basis and then, from September 1993, weekly. His progress is recorded in the daily evaluation sheets included within his hospital records.
According to Mrs Fuggle and Mr Farrell, Mrs Naughton would call in on Mr Leigh regularly, at least once a day and sometimes two or three times a day. In addition, the district nurse used to attend to dress his leg ulcers and administer his eye drops. Mr Farrell would go to his uncle's house every Saturday and, although Mrs Fuggle lived in London and was unable to travel to Hyde regularly, she would speak to Mr Leigh on the telephone every week or so.
In her statement to the police, Mrs Fuggle expressed the view that, without the level of care he received, Mr Leigh would not have been able to remain at home. She pointed out that he was 'vehemently opposed to going into hospital and wanted to stay at home'.
In the months before his death, members of the family were aware that Mr Leigh's health was deteriorating. He had a number of falls and his legs were very swollen. Mrs Naughton, whose own health was not good, found it increasingly difficult to care for him at home.
According to the medical records, Shipman visited Mr Leigh on 12th
November 1993, when he was complaining of urinary frequency. On 22nd
November, Shipman visited on account of a chest infection. On 26th
November, he visited again. The chest infection had cleared and the urinary problem had improved. Shipman checked Mr Leigh for heart failure and found his condition stable. He promised to visit in two weeks' time. On 10th
December, he visited again. He found Mr Leigh's oedema was bad; it extended to his knees but in other respects his cardiac function was stable. He increased Mr Leigh's medication. On 14th
December, Mr Leigh or someone on his behalf telephoned the surgery to say that he was wheezy and to ask for a bottle of cough medicine. However, Shipman decided to visit and found Mr Leigh was indeed wheezy. However, his condition was not serious. Air entry was equal on both sides; breath sounds were normal; there were no basal crepitations; the jugular venous pressure was not raised; heart sounds were normal and the pulse rate was 90 beats per minute. There was oedema. Shipman noted that there were no signs of failure otherwise. In summary, Mr Leigh's condition was stable. He was prescribed Alupent, to help his breathing.
Mr Farrell thinks that he probably saw his uncle on Saturday, 11th
December. He might also have seen him on Tuesday, 14th
December. He does not recall anything out of the ordinary arising out of those visits, although he says that the family was concerned about Mr Leigh's health and knew that his heart was not good. His lips were blue and his face was grey.
It appears that Mr Leigh went to the day hospital on 15th
December. The daily evaluation notes say:
'Whilst having physio treatment this am, physio (Marion) noticed that Jo's
legs were more oedematous than usual. Seen by doctor
(
illegible
)
left leg is
red and inflamed. Dry dressing applied to area which is “weeping”
antibiotics prescribed...
I have spoken to Jo's niece, (Mrs Naughton) and she will inform District
Nurses re dressing. I have sent a supply of dressing materials home with
Jo.
... No incontinence today.
... Guidance given when mobilising'
.
The Day of the Death
Shipman's visits book suggests that he decided to 're-visit' Mr Leigh on 16th
December.
According to Mr Farrell, Mrs Naughton telephoned him at work at about 1.40pm and told him that Mr Leigh had died. He went straight to her house and found her in a state of distress. She said that she had gone to Mr Leigh's house, had looked into the lounge and seen Mr Leigh dead and had then left straight away. Mr Farrell felt that there was some possibility that Mr Leigh might still be alive and he and Mrs Naughton went straight over to his uncle's house. He found Mr Leigh dead, seated 'bolt upright' on a hard-backed dining room chair with his chin on his chest. The chair, usually positioned against the table, had been pulled away and placed at a right angle to the table. Mr Farrell had never seen the chair in that position either when his uncle was sitting on it or otherwise. His uncle's face was 'a pale dull grey, drained of colour'. His eyes were open.
Mr Farrell telephoned Massey's undertakers and Shipman's surgery. Shipman arrived within half an hour. Mr Farrell recalls that Shipman was thoughtful and sympathetic towards his sister, Mrs Naughton, who was terribly upset. He recalls that Shipman felt a vein in Mr Leigh's neck, apparently checking for a pulse. He then asked Mr Farrell and Mrs Naughton to leave the room, which they did, and Shipman was left alone with Mr Leigh for some ten minutes, during which Mr Farrell assumes Shipman performed a more thorough examination of his uncle's body. Mr Farrell does not recall Shipman attempting to resuscitate his uncle.
Mr Farrell has provided an account of what his sister told him of that day's events. Mrs Naughton told him that Shipman had visited Mr Leigh earlier that day. She said she had seen Shipman's car pull up outside Mr Leigh's house and had gone to the house to see Shipman and her uncle. Mr Farrell cannot recall what the purpose of the visit was said to be or indeed whether his half-sister told him why Shipman had called, although he did not have the impression that it was an emergency call. I am satisfied that it was not. Shipman had decided to 're-visit' Mr Leigh.
Mrs Naughton told Mr Farrell that, during this visit, she had said to Shipman something like: 'We've got to do something. He can't go on like this'. Shipman replied with words to the effect that she was not to worry, as the problem would soon be resolved. In her statement to the police, Mrs Fuggle said that Mrs Naughton had told her about that conversation and had said that it had occurred during Shipman's visit on 16th
December. In their original accounts, Mr Farrell and Mrs Fuggle do not make it clear whether they had understood from Mrs Naughton whether Shipman left the house before, after or at the same time as Mrs Naughton. In supplemental statements, Mr Farrell and Mrs Fuggle have suggested that Mrs Naughton probably left Shipman alone with her uncle that day, as Mr Leigh would not have wished anyone to be present during a consultation.
There are two entries in Mr Leigh's handwritten Lloyd George notes, dated 16th
December 1993, both relating to visits. The first says:
'CHF ankle oedema DN dressing
JVP
basal creps
Gallop
refuses hospital
(
crossed out text
)
W
S
(
wait and see
)
Review tomorrow
? D/V
(
domiciliary visit
)
'
.
This entry suggests that Mr Leigh's congestive heart failure had worsened dramatically. The jugular venous pressure was raised. There were basal crepitations and the heart was galloping. Mr Leigh refused to go to hospital. Despite these alarming signs and Mr Leigh's refusal to go to hospital, Shipman gave no treatment at all. He decided to wait and see and review Mr Leigh the next day. He was apparently considering whether to arrange a domiciliary visit by a consultant physician.
The final entry, obviously made after Shipman had been summoned to see the body, records:
'CHF cert
Death
'
.
Shipman's Movements on the Day of the Death
Shipman had a full morning surgery beginning at 8.45am, with surgery appointments scheduled to end at 10.30am. From the generic evidence as to the length of time allocated to individual patients, it is likely that the appointments surgery finished after 10.30am. Nine patients attended the open surgery that was scheduled to begin at 10.30am. It is likely that Shipman was not free of surgery commitments until about noon. Shipman planned to visit five patients that day, including Mr Leigh.
At 1.30pm, Shipman had an appointment at the surgery to see Dr Banks and Mrs Anderson from the West Pennine Health Authority in connection with a proposed reduction in his prescribing practice. I think it unlikely that such a meeting would have lasted less than half an hour and might well have lasted longer. Shipman's afternoon surgery was scheduled to begin at 4pm.
The Aftermath
Mr Farrell went to Shipman's surgery the following day in order to pick up the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). He saw Shipman and had a short conversation, during which Shipman said that Mr Leigh had died from heart problems.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not been recovered, the Inquiry has had access to the counterfoil. On the counterfoil, Shipman stated that the cause of death was congestive heart failure. Duodenal ulcer had contributed to the death. He said he had seen Mr Leigh alive on the day of his death. He had seen the body after death and there would be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed Form B. The recorded time of death is
'about 1400'
, although that time is written over
'1200'
. According to Mr Farrell, Mr Leigh was dead by 1.40pm. Shipman said that he had attended Mr Leigh during his last illness for two years. He said he had seen Mr Leigh alive about one hour before death and had seen the body about two hours after death, when he had performed an external examination. The cause of death was as stated on the MCCD counterfoil. The mode of death was said to be syncope lasting minutes. The answers to the questions as to mode and cause of death were said to be based on Shipman's own observations. Shipman said that District Nurse Clegg had nursed Mr Leigh in connection with his leg ulcer. He said that no one was present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Baker categorised the death of Mr Leigh as highly suspicious following his separate consideration of the cremation forms and medical records. He made the following comment:
'Sudden death after seeing HS, plus refuses hospital - the typical pattern'
. Professor Baker was not aware that Mr Leigh had expressed to his family his reluctance to go to hospital. Under the heading 'Treatment', Professor Baker stated:
'not clear - why not managed more aggressively?'
Dr Grenville has provided two statements for the Inquiry. In preparing the first, dated 9th
October 2001, Dr Grenville had before him the police witness statement of Mrs Fuggle, Mr Leigh's medical records, the death certification and the practice documents referred to above. He did not have the statements provided to the Inquiry by Mrs Fuggle and Mr Farrell. Dr Grenville noted the left-sided stroke of May 1992 and the history of congestive heart failure. In his opinion, the oedema was probably due in part to the congestive heart failure but also to age-related failure of the valves of the veins in Mr Leigh's legs and immobility. Dr H H Wan, the consultant physician in geriatric medicine at Tameside General Hospital, recorded the same view in a letter dated 19th
March 1993, included within Mr Leigh's medical records.
Dr Grenville was of the opinion that the records kept by Shipman suggested that Mr Leigh's condition was reasonably stable during the latter half of 1993. He noted the visits in late November and early December, and that Shipman recorded that Mr Leigh's cardiac failure was stable up until 16th
December, the day of the death. That entry in the Lloyd George notes recorded
'a clear deterioration in Mr Leigh's cardiac condition...and the signs of suddenly decompensated congestive heart failure'
. Dr Grenville was of the opinion that, if the note were accurate, admission to hospital would have been appropriate. However, he noted the record of Mr Leigh's refusal to go to hospital. In those circumstances, Dr Grenville was of the opinion that it would have been appropriate to increase the treatment for congestive heart failure by giving an intravenous injection of frusemide, increasing the usual dose of captopril and possibly introducing a very strong diuretic such as metolazone. Dr Grenville noted that there was no record of any treatment having been given. He doubted that this was a genuine account of Shipman's findings that day.
Dr Grenville was of the view that the position in which Mr Leigh was found was inconsistent with a death due to congestive heart failure, but was typical of the appearance of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of opiate.
In preparing his second report to the Inquiry, dated 1st
November 2001, Dr Grenville had the additional Inquiry statements provided by Mrs Fuggle and Mr Farrell. Those statements led Dr Grenville to realise that Mr Leigh's condition was much worse towards the end of his life than he had previously thought. Although he still doubted the genuineness of Shipman's note, he considered the situation on the premise that Shipman had indeed found Mr Leigh in an unstable condition. He said that, in those circumstances, it might have been appropriate for Shipman to administer a very small (1 to 5mg) dose of diamorphine by a very slow intravenous injection. If Shipman had done that, it may be that Mr Leigh would still have died. The death might have occurred whilst the injection was being given. However, if Shipman had done this, Dr Grenville would have expected him to make a full note of the treatment and the fact that death had occurred during treatment. He would have expected Shipman to give Mrs Naughton and Mr Farrell a full account of what had happened.
Dr Grenville concludes:
'The fact that Shipman has not documented any treatment at all and the position in which the body was found still leads me to the conclusion that it is likely that Shipman gave a lethal dose of an opiate to Mr Leigh by intravenous injection with the intention of bringing about Mr Leigh's death'
.
Conclusion
There are a number of highly suspicious circumstances surrounding this death.
Mr Leigh was clearly unwell in the weeks before his death. However, on Shipman's account, as recorded in the Lloyd George notes and Form B of the cremation forms, Mr Leigh suffered a drastic deterioration in his condition on the day of his death. Shipman had decided to visit Mr Leigh that day. Shipman had not been summoned on account of any perceived deterioration or emergency. It is something of a coincidence that Mr Leigh should deteriorate suddenly at the time of Shipman's visit.
I am deeply suspicious of Shipman's note of his consultation with Mr Leigh on 16th
December. Only two days earlier, the jugular venous pressure had not been raised. The heart sounds had been normal and there had been no basal crepitations. The sudden change is too much to believe, especially as Mrs Naughton does not appear to have been aware of any sudden crisis. The note is implausible in other respects. It is incredible that Shipman would provide no treatment at all for a patient who had suddenly deteriorated in this way. I think Shipman's note has been fabricated to provide a plausible explanation for Mr Leigh's death. The only part that rings true is Shipman's claim that Mr Leigh refused to go to hospital. I think Shipman was probably aware of Mr Leigh's strong views on that subject and made the point to add verisimilitude to an otherwise wholly unconvincing story.
Dr Grenville has considered the possibility that Shipman might really have found Mr Leigh in a parlous state and might have given him a small dose of opiate in a genuine 'last ditch' attempt to bring his heart failure under control. If the attempt had failed, Mr Leigh would probably have died very quickly. This cannot have happened. Not only would any doctor who had done that be most anxious to record and explain what he had done (which Shipman did not), no doctor would just walk away, leave the relatives to find the body and not even tell them later what had happened. The idea is unthinkable. I reject this suggestion as bordering on fanciful.
My suspicions that Shipman killed Mr Leigh are heightened by the report of the conversation between Shipman and Mrs Naughton at some time shortly before the death, possibly on the day of the death, possibly a little earlier. Mrs Naughton was finding her duties in caring for her uncle to be very burdensome and I have little doubt that she wanted him to be taken into residential care. Shipman assured her that the problem would soon be resolved. It sounds as though what he had in mind as a solution was not residential care but death. This response would be wholly in keeping with his philosophy that he did not believe in prolonging the lives of elderly people in poor health. However, I shall not attach much weight to this aspect of the case. The evidence is hearsay and the meaning of his remark might have been distorted. That said, one interpretation of what Shipman said is that he was intending to end Mr Leigh's life.
I note and accept Dr Grenville's point that Mr Leigh's appearance in death was not typical of a death from congestive heart failure but was entirely typical of the appearance of many of Shipman's victims. I note also that the position of the chair, at right angles to the table, is exactly what one would expect to see if a doctor had wished to take a blood sample or give an injection and had sat the patient by the table, so that the arm could rest on the table during the procedure.
I have come to the conclusion that Shipman killed Mr Leigh. Although I recognise that Mr Leigh was unwell and it is theoretically possible that he died a natural death, the temporal association between the death and Shipman's presence drives me to the sure conclusion that this cannot have been a natural death. I think Mrs Naughton must have left Shipman alone with Mr Leigh and he took the opportunity to give him an injection of opiate, which caused his death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001