The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
John Louden Livesey
Introduction
Mr John Louden Livesey died at his home, 130 Dowson Road, Gee Cross, Hyde on Friday, 25th
July 1997 at the age of 69. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977, apart from a period of two to three years, and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He thought highly of Shipman, who certified that the cause of his death was renal failure due to hypertension.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the information contained in the cremation certificate, the death of Mr Livesey was moderately suspicious. Professor Baker did not have access to Mr Livesey's medical records. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Joanne Louise Livesey-Carter and Mr Brian Livesey-Carter (Mr Livesey's daughter and son-in-law) and Mr Iain Nellis (a technician with the Greater Manchester Ambulance Service). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville. They also prepared a list of telephone calls made from telephones used by Shipman over the relevant period.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Livesey but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mr and Mrs Livesey-Carter. The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Livesey's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
For many years, Mr Livesey ran his own business, which was concerned with ventilation systems. He was exposed to asbestos dust during his working life. At the time of his death he was semi-retired. He still did the firm's accounts, working from home. He was divorced and he and his former wife lived separate lives in the former matrimonial home.
Mr Livesey's family knew that he had high blood pressure and chronic bronchitis but thought that in other respects he was well. He led quite an active life. He did his own shopping and household chores. He played snooker once a week and visited a public house about twice a week.
Dr Grenville has reviewed Mr Livesey's medical records and reported that Mr Livesey had a long history of heavy smoking and alcohol consumption. He was diagnosed as having high blood pressure in 1986 and developed chronic bronchitis seven years before his death, although lung function tests showed that this was not particularly severe. From time to time he complained of abdominal pain and was treated for dyspepsia. This complaint was probably linked to his alcohol intake. On 29th
March 1997, Mr Livesey was referred by Shipman to a general surgeon, Mr M Cooper Wilson, because of abdominal distension. On 8th
May 1997, Mr Cooper Wilson saw Mr Livesey and was concerned that he might have fluid in his abdomen caused by alcoholic liver disease. Mr Livesey was referred to Dr B E Boyes, a consultant physician, who saw him on 17th
June 1997 but was unable to confirm the finding of fluid in the abdomen. Dr Boyes thought that Mr Livesey's abdominal distension was probably due to obesity. It was noted that his earlier liver function tests were only mildly deranged and that, on the day he saw Dr Boyes, his urea and electrolytes and liver function tests were all normal. Dr Boyes was concerned by shadowing on Mr Livesey's chest x-ray and requested a further opinion from a chest physician, Dr C R Payne. Dr Payne reviewed Mr Livesey's records and x-rays and, having previously diagnosed pleural calcification due to asbestos exposure, said that he did not feel that there had been any significant deterioration.
The last entry in Mr Livesey's handwritten records was made in March 1997 and notes the decision to refer him to Mr Cooper Wilson on account of abdominal distension. Thereafter the computerised records refer to the results of the referrals and the advice which had been given.
The Day before Death
Mrs Livesey-Carter visited her father on Thursday, 24th
July 1997 when he appeared well. However, he complained of pain in his stomach and said that he had been to see Shipman, who had taken a sample of blood. Mrs Livesey-Carter told the police that Shipman had told her father that he would visit the following day with the blood test results. However, she told the Inquiry that Shipman had said he would either telephone or call round with them.
The practice appointments sheet for 24th
July 1997 confirms that Mr Livesey was seen by Shipman in the surgery on that day. The following entries appear in the computerised records for 24th
July 1997:
'Duodenal ulcer - (DU)
clinically tagamet
Seen in GP's surgery
Dr H F Shipman'
.
An audit trail carried out by the Inquiry has revealed that these two entries were created on 24th
July 1997 at 11.14am and 11.20am respectively. They would suggest a diagnosis of a stomach ulcer for which Tagamet, an anti-acid treatment, was prescribed. A further, more detailed entry dated 24th
July was made on the following day.
The Day of the Death
On 25th
July 1997, Mrs Livesey-Carter went to the Royal Lancashire Horse Show with her mother.
Between about 11am and noon, Mr Livesey telephoned his son-in-law to say that he was preparing the monthly business accounts and asked if he had any relevant documents. Mr Livesey-Carter told the police that his father did not mention that he felt ill but did say that Shipman had not yet visited. Mr Livesey-Carter promised to call on his father-in-law on his way home from work.
The surgery appointments sheet shows that Shipman saw six patients during open surgery, which was scheduled to last from 10.15am to 11am. His next patient was to be seen at 11.30am, followed by two patients who were probably to be seen together at 11.45am. After that consultation, Shipman was free until 2pm and able to carry out his home visits, of which three were recorded in the visits book. Mr Livesey's name does not appear in the visits book for that day.
There are two entries in Mr Livesey's computerised records for 25th
July 1997 suggesting that the test results from the blood sample taken the previous day had become available. The haemoglobin estimation and white cell count were normal. The audit trail has revealed that these entries were created on 25th
July at 1.03pm and 1.04pm respectively. Whether they were made by Shipman or by one of his staff, it seems likely that the results themselves would have been brought to Shipman's attention, since he had told Mr Livesey that he would convey the results to him that day.
The telephone billing records for the surgery reveal that no telephone call was made to Mr Livesey from any of the surgery telephone numbers on the day of his death. Thus, it appears that Mr Livesey was not informed of the results of his tests over the telephone. The receipt of those results probably reminded Shipman that he was to call on Mr Livesey that day.
Mr Livesey-Carter arrived at his father-in-law's house shortly before 4pm. He found the front door to be unlocked and on entering found that the key had been left in the lock on the inside. This was very unusual because Mr Livesey would never leave the front door unlocked, nor would he leave his key in the lock.
Mr Livesey-Carter entered the lounge where he saw Mr Livesey lying on his side on the sofa, apparently asleep. This was not unusual and Mr Livesey-Carter walked through into the kitchen and put the kettle on. When he returned, he looked at his father-in-law more closely. He noticed that he looked blue and appeared to be dead. He telephoned for an ambulance. Mr Livesey was wearing a tracksuit and a pair of slippers. He still had his glasses on and appeared peaceful, as though he had just fallen asleep. There was a full cup of cold tea next to his computer. Mr Livesey-Carter found it strange that his father-in-law was still wearing his slippers and glasses because he would usually take them off if he lay down for a rest.
Mr Livesey-Carter checked his father-in-law's computer and the screen saver disappeared, revealing the accounts which his father-in-law had been working on. Mr Livesey-Carter found this strange, because if Mr Livesey left his computer for any reason he would always switch it off so as to keep his financial affairs confidential from his ex-wife.
A short while later the paramedics arrived. They told Mr Livesey-Carter that they could not attempt resuscitation, as Mr Livesey had been dead for too long. Mr Nellis remembers that the body was very blue, almost purple. The paramedics instructed Mr Livesey-Carter to telephone for Mr Livesey's general practitioner.
Mr Livesey-Carter telephoned Shipman's surgery and was surprised when Shipman arrived at the house within minutes. Shipman confirmed the fact of death and said that he would issue a death certificate. He also said that there was no need for a post-mortem examination. According to Mr Livesey-Carter's police witness statement, Shipman told him this was because he had seen Mr Livesey 'that morning'. However, Mr Livesey-Carter has subsequently told the Inquiry that Shipman said a post-mortem examination was not necessary because he had seen Mr Livesey 'recently'. Mr Livesey-Carter felt that Shipman's comments about the post-mortem examination were directed more at the paramedics than at him.
The Ambulance Service Patient Report Form contains the following note:
'PT WITH H/O HYPERTENSION, COAD
SEEN BY G.P. WITHIN LAST 24/24
G.P. ARRIVED ON SCENE
- CERTIFIED -'
.
The note that Mr Livesey had been seen by his doctor in the previous 24 hours was based on what Shipman told the paramedics, according to Mr Nellis. Timings entered on the form suggest that the ambulance was called at 3.56pm, and arrived at 4.04pm. The computerised medical records contain a further, fuller entry purportedly relating to 24th
July 1997. It reads as follows:
'Examination of patient
First episode
bp 160/100 denies missing tabs/alcohol feels ill 2 plus
prot urine liver ok jvp up oedema trace basal creps...early
lvf bloods and see ? ref increase enalapil
(
sic
)
to 40'
.
The audit trail carried out by the Inquiry has revealed that this entry was created on 25th
July 1997 at 1.57pm. The entry, which must have been made by Shipman or on the basis of information supplied by him, suggests that Shipman found that Mr Livesey's blood pressure was raised at 160/100, that he carried out a urine test which was positive for protein, that the liver was 'OK' (in other words, not palpable), that the jugular venous pressure was raised, that there was a trace of oedema (presumably at the ankles) and that he heard crepitations at the base of the lungs. Shipman also suggests that Mr Livesey had denied any failure to take his tablets. Shipman diagnosed early left ventricular failure and took blood samples. The last phrases are not clear. It is possible that Shipman was saying that he had decided to increase Mr Livesey's daily dose of enalapril to 40mg and considered whether to refer him to a consultant. It is also possible that the note was intended to suggest that Shipman had decided to review Mr Livesey at some future time, with reference to a possible increase in his enalapril dose. It matters not which was intended. If this were a genuine entry, the recorded signs would justify a diagnosis of early left ventricular failure. However, the question arises whether or not this was a genuine entry relating to the findings at the consultation on 24th
July. As the entry was not made until shortly before 2pm on 25th
July, a high degree of suspicion must arise that this was not a genuine entry but was fabricated in order to explain Mr Livesey's death, which was about to be discovered.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), saying that he had last seen Mr Livesey alive on 24th
July 1997, the day before the death. He certified the cause of death as renal failure due to hypertension. He said that chronic obstructive airways disease (COAD) had contributed to the death. He said that the approximate interval between the onset of renal failure and death was a period of
'Days only'
. The underlying hypertension had been present for 12 years.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that death had occurred at
'About 13.30'
on 25th July 1997. He said that he had attended Mr Livesey during his last illness for five years. That answer was completely at odds with what he had written on the MCCD. He said that he last saw Mr Livesey alive
'About 24 hours'
before his death. Shipman said that he saw the body about four hours after death. He claimed to have made a complete external examination of the body. The cause of death was as stated on the MCCD and the mode of death was a coma lasting minutes. Dr Grenville has said that the stated mode of death contains a contradiction in terms, since coma, by definition, lasts at least hours and more often days, weeks or months. When asked whether his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others Shipman did not answer the question but wrote:
'Found by son dead who had telephoned him at 1300 hrs'
.
The Expert Evidence
As Dr Grenville observed, the third (backdated) entry in the computerised notes for 24th
July does not suggest that Mr Livesey was seriously ill and there is nothing in that note to suggest that Mr Livesey's kidneys were malfunctioning. At the time when he reported to the police, Dr Grenville was unaware that this entry had been made on 25th
July and backdated to the 24th
.
The original laboratory reports with the results of blood tests, to which the two entries in the computerised records made shortly after 1pm on 25th
July 1997 relate, were not found within the Lloyd George record card envelope. Further, there is no record in Mr Livesey's medical records of the results of any kidney function tests taken on either 24th
or 25th
July 1997. Dr Grenville told the police that there is:
'absolutely no evidence in Mr Livesey's notes of renal failure and acute renal failure leading to death within days only occurs as a complication in a patient who is extremely seriously ill from other causes. It is inconceivable that a patient with acute renal failure which was to kill him within a matter of hours would feel well enough to work on his accounts on his computer'
.
Dr Grenville said there was nothing in the extended entry dated 24th
July 1997 (he mistakenly refers to November) which could have caused Shipman to expect Mr Livesey to die the next day. In Dr Grenville's opinion, the death was sudden and unexpected and Shipman should have reported it to the coroner with a view to an autopsy being performed.
Conclusion
There are several highly suspicious circumstances surrounding this death.
Although Shipman did not admit that he had visited Mr Livesey on the day of his death, I strongly suspect that he did. If he did and if no one spoke to or saw Mr Livesey alive after the visit, the temporal connection between the visit and the death would, of itself, be a highly suspicious circumstance. If Shipman visited and later sought to conceal his visit, the level of suspicion would rise further.
The following factors have persuaded me that Shipman did visit Mr Livesey on the day of his death. First, at about midday on 25th
July, Mr Livesey told his son-in-law that he was expecting Shipman but that he had not yet arrived. It appears that Shipman had promised to let Mr Livesey have his test results that day. We know that he did not use the surgery telephone to contact Mr Livesey. Second, when Mr Livesey-Carter arrived at the house at about 4pm, he found the front door unlocked and the key in the lock on the inside. That would indicate that someone had called at the house, that Mr Livesey had let the person in and that he or she had left the house but was not shown out by Mr Livesey. Although it is theoretically possible that some other person could have called, rather than Shipman, Shipman was expected and no other person has told Mr and Mrs Livesey-Carter that they visited shortly before the death. In any event, an unlocked door is a common feature in several cases in which Shipman killed. Third, it would be something of a coincidence if Shipman happened to make a detailed backdated entry in the medical records shortly before 2pm if nothing had happened to trigger that action. Just after 1pm, it was probably he who entered the previous day's blood test results in the records. Just before 2pm, he made the backdated entry. This strongly suggests to me that Shipman had had further contact with Mr Livesey in the meantime. Finally, I mention that I do not place any weight on the evidence of what Shipman told the paramedics as Mr Livesey-Carter is not sure whether Shipman told them he had seen Mr Livesey that day or 'recently'.
That Mr Livesey should have died quite suddenly of kidney failure on 25th
July is medically most improbable. On the previous day, he went to the surgery complaining of pain in his stomach. Shipman took a blood sample and diagnosed a duodenal ulcer. These is nothing in the note made on that day to suggest that Mr Livesey had kidney failure, or was seriously ill, or at risk of dying a sudden death. At no time did Shipman test Mr Livesey's kidney function. Dr Grenville says it is inconceivable that someone should die suddenly of kidney failure shortly after having worked on accounts at a computer. Also, it is hard to see on what possible basis Shipman could supposedly have come to the conclusion that Mr Livesey died of renal failure some 24 hours after he had last seen him. Even the backdated note made on 25th
July would not have helped him. How Shipman was supposed to have known that the mode of death was a coma of a few minutes' duration is not clear. In any event, this would not be a typical mode of death where the cause was renal failure. Shipman's claim that Mr Livesey died of renal failure is nonsense. Unless Shipman killed Mr Livesey, he could not possibly have known why he had died and the death should have been referred to the coroner. There was an additional reason why this death should have been referred. Mr Livesey had been exposed to asbestos in the past and the possibility that his death was related to that should have been investigated.
The backdated entry made on 25th
July is highly suspicious. It purports to relate to a consultation in the surgery, at which time Mr Livesey must have been well enough to drive into Hyde. It is hard to see any innocent reason why Shipman would have made this backdated entry when he had already made his clinical entries concerning the consultation of 24th
July. In many respects the backdated entry is typical of notes which I have seen in cases where Shipman has killed his patient. In these cases, Shipman has fabricated a note in order to provide an explanation for the death. However, in the present case, the fabricated note does not tally with the cause of death which Shipman was later to certify. It appears to me that Shipman probably intended to kill Mr Livesey and to certify the cause of death as left ventricular failure. He could then have relied on the fabricated note. For some reason, which I cannot fathom, Shipman decided to put the death down to renal failure. That there is nothing in Shipman's note suggestive of renal failure and nothing to suggest that Mr Livesey was seriously ill demonstrates that the attempt at falsification was poor, but does not dilute its sinister connotation.
The circumstances in the house suggest that Mr Livesey was working at his computer when he was disturbed. He unlocked his door. He did not drink his cup of tea. He did not switch off his computer. He then died on his sofa, still wearing his slippers and glasses. He did not re-lock the door. Mr Livesey's peaceful appearance in death was wholly consistent with death by lethal injection of diamorphine. That appearance, combined with the evidence as to how he spent his last few hours, is wholly inconsistent with death due to renal failure. Mr Livesey's appearance in death was not typical of any of the common causes of death, such as stroke or heart attack, from which Mr Livesey could possibly have died a sudden death.
There is an odd feature of the case, which relates to Form B. Shipman said that the death occurred at about 1.30pm. How he thought he could estimate the time with any accuracy, when seeing the body some time after 4pm, I cannot imagine. He often pretended that he could estimate the time of death by body temperature, which Dr Grenville says is not possible, at least without taking an internal body temperature. Usually Shipman stated a time of death several hours after his own last visit. He would distance himself from the death. Here, he has given a time of death which was probably round about or only a little later than the time of his own last visit, if, as I believe, he made a visit on 25th
July. It is also odd that he should have claimed, falsely, that Mr Livesey's son (by which he probably meant son-in-law) had telephoned Mr Livesey at 1pm, presumably thereby establishing that he was still alive at that time. If Shipman visited at about 12.30pm, these entries would make sense from Shipman's viewpoint. If he had been entering the house, or his car had been seen outside, he would be distancing himself from the death in the usual way, albeit by a narrow margin. However, if he had wanted to distance himself from the death more effectively, one might have expected him to estimate the time of death much later in the afternoon. It appears to me that Shipman was either very confused that day or was possibly becoming careless in covering his tracks.
Taken together, the circumstances of this case persuade me that Mr Livesey was unlawfully killed by Shipman. His method was probably the usual one, an intravenous injection of strong opiate. Despite the slightly unusual features of the case, I feel sure of this conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001