The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Wilfred Leigh
Introduction
Mr Wilfred Leigh died at his home, 54 Chapel Street, Hyde on Wednesday, 30th
June 1982 at the age of 74. He lived there with his wife, Mrs Doris Leigh, who has since died. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and held him in high regard. Shipman certified the cause of his death was respiratory failure due to chronic bronchitis.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker stated in his report that he regarded Mr Leigh's death as suspicious. Accordingly, the police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Bernice Fuggle, Mr Leigh's niece. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Fuggle. Mr Leigh's general practitioner and hospital records have not survived. The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the cremation certificate, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil and Shipman's visits book for 1982. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Leigh worked as a postman and took early retirement on the grounds of ill health about 20 years before he died. Mrs Fuggle says that, after his retirement, he spent the rest of his days 'dying slowly'. She says that he was a heavy smoker and suffered from 'terrible problems' with his lungs. She does not know the nature of his condition but nobody ever said that he had cancer. She recalls that he took pills in abundance. Shipman would visit him quite regularly, to see how he was. Mrs Fuggle's mother once told her that Shipman had said to Mr Leigh's wife that, if Mr Leigh's pain became too much for him, he would give him something to ease it. Mrs Fuggle told the police that, in his final years, her uncle would often express a desire to die because of his ill health. His wife was his main carer. When Mrs Fuggle last saw her uncle, in April or May 1982, he looked 'terrible' and she expected him to die any day.
Shipman's visits book reveals that he visited Mr Leigh on four consecutive days at the end of April 1982, then approximately once a week until 2nd
June. He did not then visit until 28th
June. Shipman was on holiday from 7th
June until Monday, 28th
June. There is no entry in the visits book for 29th
or 30th
June, the day of the death.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Fuggle has no firsthand knowledge of the events surrounding the death and the account she has provided to the Inquiry has come from conversations she had with her mother, Mrs Phyllis Farrell, who has since died.
According to this account, Shipman visited Mr Leigh some time during the afternoon of 30th
June. Both Mrs Leigh and Mrs Farrell were present. Shipman administered an injection for Mr Leigh's pain. Mrs Fuggle believes that her mother might have said that it was a morphine injection, although she is not sure of that. Mr Leigh died at some time during the evening of that day. Mrs Fuggle does not know anything further about the circumstances of his death and cannot say what effect the injection appeared to have or how long Mr Leigh lived after it had been given.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that the cause of death was respiratory failure due to chronic bronchitis. He said that he had seen Mr Leigh alive on the day of the death and had seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that death had occurred at
'1915 hrs'
on 30th
June 1982. He said that he had attended Mr Leigh during his last illness for a period of four and a half years, which would be from the time of Shipman's arrival in Hyde. He said that he last saw Mr Leigh alive within one hour of his death and saw the body within 20 minutes of death, when he made a complete external examination. The cause of death was as stated on the MCCD counterfoil. Shipman said that the mode of death was a coma of minutes' duration. He stated that his answers to the questions concerning the cause and mode of death were based on the observations of Mr Leigh's wife and sister. Shipman said that Mr Leigh's wife and his sister had nursed Mr Leigh during his last illness, and that they were also present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville has told the Inquiry that the paucity of evidence prevents him from forming a medical judgement as to the likelihood that Shipman was involved in Mr Leigh's death. As Mr Leigh had chronic bronchitis, it would have been dangerous to inject Mr Leigh with morphine or diamorphine, because of the risk of inducing respiratory depression. Respiratory failure and chronic bronchitis do not usually give rise to the degree of pain which calls for opiate analgesics. However, if Mr Leigh had been in severe pain from some other cause, Shipman and Mr and Mrs Leigh might have felt that the risks inherent in giving an opiate were worth taking. There is some hearsay evidence to suggest that Mr Leigh had been in pain and that Shipman had given an injection to relieve it. If Mr Leigh had not been in pain on the day of his death, his wife might have commented on the inconsistency of giving a pain-relieving injection.
Professor Baker found the death to be moderately suspicious on his consideration of the cremation documentation, no doubt because Shipman visited a short time before the death.
Conclusion
There is very little evidence on which to base this decision.
It is clear from the evidence that Mr Leigh was very ill shortly before his death. The last time Mrs Fuggle saw him, she expected him to die at any time. He clearly required nursing care.
Although Mrs Fuggle's account of the day of the death is secondhand, it is broadly consistent with Shipman's entries on Form B. On Form B, Shipman said that he visited about an hour before the death. Mrs Fuggle told both the police and the Inquiry that her mother told her that Shipman gave her uncle an injection on the day of his death. I think that is probably true. Moreover, since all the evidence touching on the reason for the injection suggests that it was given for pain, it is quite likely to have been an injection of opiate. We do not know whether the injection was given intravenously or intramuscularly. Mr Leigh did not die immediately after the injection but it does appear that he died within the hour. As Mr Leigh's respiratory function was already severely impaired, a relatively modest dose of diamorphine might well have hastened Mr Leigh's end. If the injection was given by the intramuscular route, it is possible that the injection contributed to or hastened the death. As Dr Grenville has explained, an intramuscular injection of opiate will be at maximal effect within between 30 minutes and an hour. It is therefore quite possible that the injection given by Shipman caused or contributed to the death.
Having said that, it is not possible to determine what Shipman intended when he gave the injection. Supposing that the injection was of an opiate, we do not know how much was given. We do not know whether Mr Leigh's pain or distress was such as to justify the giving of an injection of opiate, despite the risks that such a course would entail. It is possible that Shipman gave an injection for proper therapeutic reasons for the relief of pain and distress, but recognising that the drug might also have the effect of hastening death. It must be admitted that there is also a possibility that Shipman, recognising that Mr Leigh was in distress and did not have long to live, decided to give him a dose which he knew would hasten the end. As Shipman was prepared to kill patients who were not close to death, it is unlikely that he would shrink from hastening Mr Leigh's end by a few hours or a day or two.
I am unable to reach a positive conclusion about Mr Leigh's death, although I am suspicious about it.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001