The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Jane Ellen Lord
Introduction
Mrs Jane Ellen Lord died at her home, 961 Rochdale Road, Walsden, Todmorden on Tuesday, 8th
April 1975 at the age of 86. She had been registered as a patient at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Practice since moving to Todmorden in March 1975, although it is not known whether she was registered as a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was left ventricular failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
Mrs Lord's death was one of the 22 deaths for which the cause was certified by Shipman during his time in Todmorden. Following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's clinical audit in January 2001, the police investigated the death and took a statement from Mr Edward Jonathan Kershaw, Mrs Lord's grandson.
No inquest was held at the time of Mrs Lord's death but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mr Kershaw. Although Mr Kershaw's mother was present at the moment of Mrs Lord's death, she has not been interviewed, as she is said to be frail and suffering from a poor memory. Mrs Lord's medical records have not survived and, apart from the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), there are no contemporaneous documents.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
In March 1975, Mr Kershaw's mother, Mrs Edith Mary Kershaw, and grandmother, Mrs Lord, moved to Todmorden, so as to be nearer to Mr Kershaw and his wife. Soon after the move, Mrs Lord began to feel very tired and unwell. She spent a few days in bed but felt no better. Mr Kershaw was not aware of any specific symptoms from which she was suffering. In his statement to the Inquiry, he describes her as feeling 'a bit off colour'. Eventually, Mrs Lord or her daughter telephoned the Abraham Ormerod Medical Practice and requested a visit from one of the doctors.
It appears that Shipman attended but it is not known on what day he first came, what examination he made, what diagnosis he reached or what treatment he provided. Nor is it known how many times Shipman saw Mrs Lord before her death. Mr Kershaw can only say that Shipman visited her at least once before the day of her death.
Mr Kershaw visited his grandmother on 7th
April, the day before she died. She was still in bed. She was sitting up and seemed quite well. She said that the doctor was coming to see her the next day and she thought that she would get up after he had been. Mr Kershaw stayed with her for about half an hour.
The Day of the Death
In his police statement, Mr Kershaw said that his mother was alone with his grandmother when she died. Beyond that, he said that his mother did not say much about the circumstances of his grandmother's death. He said that he did not know if the doctor had visited Mrs Lord on the day of her death. Mr Kershaw said that his mother had recently told him that Shipman had attended his grandmother after she had died but, as his mother was a little confused, he was not sure if that was correct.
After providing a statement to the police, Mr Kershaw has apparently thought more about what his mother told him about Mrs Lord's death. He has also spoken to his wife, who was present at the time when he and his mother had a conversation about Mrs Lord's death. Mr Kershaw is now able to say that his mother told him that Shipman had visited Mrs Lord on the day of her death. Shipman had seen her alone in her room for a short time. The time of this visit is not known, save that it was before lunch. Some time after Shipman had gone, Mrs Lord ate her lunch and, some time after that, she suddenly died. Mr Kershaw's mother was with her. Mrs Edith Kershaw telephoned the surgery and Shipman came to the house. Whether he brought the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death with him then is not known. Mr Kershaw was informed of his grandmother's death that day although, by the time he reached her house, the undertakers had removed her body.
Conclusion
Mrs Lord was of advanced years and, in the days before her death, she was sufficiently tired and unwell to stay in bed. She requested a visit from the doctor. We know from the generic evidence of Dr John Grenville that the certified cause of death, left ventricular failure, can be of sudden onset. The usual symptoms would be extreme tiredness and lack of energy. The patient might also be breathless but that might not be apparent if she was resting in bed. Thus, there is consistency between Mr Kershaw's observations and the certified cause of death.
There is a conflict between what Mr Kershaw told the police and what he told the Inquiry. The hearsay account contained within Mr Kershaw's Inquiry statement must be treated with caution, especially as it relates to events more than a quarter of a century ago. If Shipman did in fact visit Mrs Lord during the morning of the day of her death, then the possibility that he administered a lethal injection of opiates must be considered. However, from the course of events described, it seems highly unlikely that any opiates were given. Professor Henry McQuay and Dr Grenville have given joint generic evidence to the Inquiry as to the effects of the administration of opiates and the timing of those effects. If a lethal injection of opiates were administered intravenously, then death would follow within minutes. If administered intramuscularly, a fatal injection of opiates would have a maximal effect within 30 to 60 minutes, during which time the patient would lapse into unconsciousness and die. In the immediate post-injection period, an onlooker might not see anything strange but, within 15 to 30 minutes, it would be clear that something was seriously wrong. From the history now given of the day of Mrs Lord's death, it is clear that she had not received a lethal dose of opiate from Shipman as, some time after he left, Mrs Lord ate her lunch and it was some time after that when she suddenly died.
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Lord died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001