The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Eva Lyons
Introduction
Mrs Eva Lyons died at her home, 16 Keswick Close, Todmorden on Monday, 17th
March 1975 which was the day before her 71st
birthday. Mrs Lyons and her husband, Mr Richard Lyons, probably registered at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre in 1965 or 1966. They both liked Shipman and thought highly of him. At the time of Mrs Lyons' death, Shipman had been practising in Todmorden for about one year. He certified that the cause of her death was carcinoma of the oesophagus.
Mrs Lyons' death was one of the 22 for which the cause was certified by Shipman during his time in Todmorden. In January 2001, following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's report, the police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Norma Bartlett, Mrs Lyons' daughter.
No inquest was held at the time of Mrs Lyons' death but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Bartlett and has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville. Mrs Lyons' medical records have not survived and, apart from the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), there are no relevant contemporaneous documents.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Lyons lived with her husband. Their daughter lived in Coventry and would visit them about every two months. She used to speak on the telephone to one of her parents, usually her father, at least every three weeks.
Mrs Lyons enjoyed good health until about 15 to 18 months before her death, when it was thought she had developed a stomach ulcer. However, further investigation revealed that Mrs Lyons had cancer of the oesophagus. She lost weight, as she could not keep her food down. She was offered treatment, which was said to be of an experimental nature, and attended the Royal Halifax Infirmary quite regularly. Mrs Bartlett recalls visiting her mother in hospital and being shocked at how ill she looked.
At a visit about two months before the death, her daughter recalls that Mrs Lyons appeared fitter than she had for some time. She did not appear to be in pain. She was up and about and the two women sat in the garden.
During her last illness, Shipman would call to see Mrs Lyons every two to three days. He used to say that he was visiting other patients in the area.
Mrs Bartlett did not see her mother in the terminal stages of her illness. Dr Grenville has said that cancer of the oesophagus is very difficult to treat, even nowadays. The patient often becomes unable to eat or drink, and deterioration and death may be very rapid. Mrs Bartlett spoke to her father at some time prior to her mother's death, although it is not clear when. He did not express concern about Mrs Lyons' state of health. It may be that he did not want to upset Mrs Bartlett. It seems to me that it is highly likely that, in the terminal phase of her illness, Mrs Lyons was in pain or distress and would almost certainly have needed pain relief.
The Day of the Death
On 17th
March, at approximately 11.20pm, Mr Lyons telephoned Mrs Bartlett and told her that her mother had died at 11pm.
Mrs Bartlett has given two slightly different accounts of what her father told her about the circumstances of Mrs Lyons' death. It is not surprising that Mrs Bartlett has difficulty in remembering the details, given the passage of time.
In her statement to the police, Mrs Bartlett said that her father told her that Shipman had been with her mother when she died. Shipman had given her an injection in the top of her hand and she had died shortly afterwards. Her father did not say what the injection was. He expressed the view that Shipman might have helped her 'on her way'. However, the death was not in any way unexpected. Mrs Bartlett did not know whether Shipman had been called to the house on the evening of 17th
March, or whether he had made an unsolicited visit.
In her statement to the Inquiry, Mrs Bartlett said that when her father telephoned to say that her mother had died, he told her that Shipman had given her mother an injection in the back of her hand 'to ease the pain'. The two men had then talked for a while and then Shipman said that Mrs Lyons had died.
Mrs Bartlett told the Inquiry that the following day, when she arrived in Todmorden, her father gave her the impression that Shipman had called to see Mrs Lyons unexpectedly some time before 11pm. He did not say that her mother had been particularly poorly or depressed that day.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville has considered the evidence in this case. He noted that Shipman gave an injection into the back of the hand, which must have been given intravenously. He also noted the absence of any evidence to suggest that Mrs Lyons was particularly distressed or in severe pain on the day of her death. Dr Grenville concluded:
'Although there is no direct evidence in this case it does seem possible that this was a case of euthanasia. The injection given to Mrs Lyons by Shipman may well have hastened her death. Because there is no clear evidence as to Mrs Lyons's state immediately before her death it is impossible to say by how long the death may have been hastened. Given that the family appeared to have expressed no concerns at the time, however, it seems likely that Mrs Lyons's death was expected imminently'
.
Interview
On 28th
November 1975, Mr Donald Charles McIntosh, a Home Office Drugs Inspector, and Detective Sergeant McKeating of the Drugs Squad interviewed Shipman at 'The Retreat', a rehabilitation centre in York. During the course of the interview, Shipman admitted having issued two prescriptions for pethidine in the name of Mrs Lyons. When shown the prescriptions, Shipman commented as follows:
'She had one or two out of the first ten but the rest I had myself'
.
Conclusion
It is not possible to reach a firm conclusion as to Mrs Lyons' state of health immediately before her death. Mrs Bartlett does not really know how her mother was at that time. However, if Mr Lyons had the impression that Shipman had 'helped' his wife to die, and was not alarmed or distressed by that possibility, it seems reasonable to infer that he believed that his wife's prognosis was hopeless and that she was suffering considerable pain or distress. I think Mrs Lyons was probably in the terminal stage of her illness and was in either pain or distress or both. It seems likely that Mr Lyons called Shipman out late that night because his wife was suffering.
If she were, it would be appropriate for Shipman to administer an opiate to relieve that pain and distress. It would be his duty to make the best assessment he could of the amount needed to relieve the pain and distress. He would know that the amount needed could have the effect of depressing Mrs Lyons' respiration and might hasten her death. Provided that he assessed the dose in good faith, believing that the amount was necessary for the relief of pain, his actions would be appropriate and lawful. If, however, he assessed the dose intending that it would hasten Mrs Lyons' death, his actions would be unlawful, even though he might have felt it was appropriate to end Mrs Lyons' suffering.
There is good evidence that Shipman gave Mrs Lyons an intravenous injection shortly before her death. It is possible that the injection was of pethidine, but it is also possible that it was of a stronger opiate such as morphine or diamorphine. It would be normal practice for a doctor to have a supply of such drugs in his bag for use in emergencies and at this time Shipman would have been entitled to carry such drugs with him. A very large dose of pethidine would be required to cause death. However, it would have been quite possible for Shipman to give an excessive dose of morphine or diamorphine, which would cause death. If a lethal dose were given, death would follow within five to ten minutes. There is evidence that death followed quite shortly after the injection and that Mr Lyons and Shipman talked during that time. We do not know how large a dose was given, but that the interval was so short, gives rise to a strong suspicion that the dose was a lethal one.
We now know that, in later years, Shipman was to become a serial murderer. We also know that he used intravenous injections of opiate as his preferred method of killing.
I have come to the conclusion that it is likely that Shipman deliberately gave Mrs Lyons an excessive dose of an opiate, with the result that he hastened her death. I think she was probably in severe pain. I also think it likely that death was imminent and her life was not shortened by very much.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001