The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Robert Henry Lingard
Introduction
Mr Robert Henry Lingard died at his home, 2 Eagle Street, Todmorden on Tuesday, 21st
January 1975 at the age of 62. He lived with his wife, Mrs Emily Lingard. Their home was in the centre of Todmorden, about 150 yards from the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre. Mr Lingard was a patient of Dr John Michael Grieve, although it was Shipman who certified that his death was caused by bronchiectasis with emphysema. Shipman certified the cause of death in relation to three patients who died that day.
Mr Lingard's death was one of the 22 deaths for which the cause was certified by Shipman during his time in Todmorden. Following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's report, the police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Lingard's son, Mr John Marshall Lingard, and from Mrs Margaret Lingard (to whom I shall refer as Mrs Lingard), who used to be married to Mr John Marshall Lingard and who worked as a district nurse. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr John Lingard, Mrs Lingard and from Dr Grieve. Both Mr John Lingard and Mrs Lingard gave oral evidence on 6th
November 2001.
The medical records are no longer available. The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and the cremation certificate are the only relevant surviving contemporaneous documents.
Personal Background
Mr Lingard had worked in a forge making spindles for shuttles. He was a keen musician and a good handyman. He smoked heavily. He retired from work prematurely, two or three years before he died. The reason for his retirement was his poor respiratory health which, as Dr Grieve explained to Mr John Lingard, was likely to deteriorate and lead to his father's death.
Dr Grieve cannot recollect whether Mr Lingard was his patient or whether it was he or Shipman who was treating him at the time of his death. He says that it is possible that both might have been treating Mr Lingard in the last ten months of his life.
As Dr Grieve had anticipated, Mr Lingard's health declined and about two or three months before he died he became so breathless that he could not climb the stairs. His bed was brought downstairs. Mrs Lingard remembers an occasion when he was admitted to hospital with pneumonia. She remembers that he was on some sort of medication. Mr John Lingard remembers that his father had oxygen at home, although he was reluctant to use the mask. Mrs Lingard does not remember this. Mr John Lingard remembers that his father also used to complain of chest pains, which he said were like a tight band around his chest preventing him from breathing in.
Concurrent with the deterioration in his physical condition, Mr Lingard suffered deterioration in his mental state. He started to have 'funny turns'. He would wake in the night and walk down the street in his nightclothes. Dr Grieve explained to Mr Lingard's son that this was because of the lack of oxygen to his brain. Mr Lingard became very upset about his condition.
Mr John Lingard and his wife visited his father very frequently in the period immediately before his death. When the death occurred it was expected.
The Day of the Death
Mr John Lingard has little recollection of the circumstances immediately surrounding his father's death. Mr John Lingard believes that his father was already dead at the time when he and his wife arrived at Mr Lingard's house.
Mrs Lingard says that she has a clear recollection of the day of her father-in-law's death. Between about 5.30pm and possibly as late as 8pm, Mrs Lingard says that she and her husband received a telephone call from Shipman to say that Mr Lingard had died. Shipman told them to attend the house immediately and said that he would wait there until they arrived. He said that Mr Lingard's widow was very upset. Mrs Lingard says that she was surprised, not only by the death itself, which was unexpected, but also because she thought it unusual for Shipman to have been on a house call so late. She assumed that her mother-in-law had put in an emergency call to the surgery.
The Lingards drove to Eagle Street, which was about five miles from their home. Shipman was at the house and seemed very considerate. Mrs Lingard remembers that Shipman said that Mr Lingard had died of a heart attack, although this was not what was certified. She would not have been surprised had this been the case, given what she knew about her father-in-law's breathing problems. For the same reason she did not expect a post-mortem examination.
To the best of Mrs Lingard's recollection, her father-in-law was dead in bed upstairs when she arrived. He would only have been in bed during the day if he was ill and that was the assumption she made. It appears that Mrs Emily Lingard, Mr Lingard's wife, did not give an account of the day's events to her son and daughter-in-law. If she did, they have forgotten.
The Aftermath
Mr John Lingard has no recollection of any of the procedural steps following the death. He has never thought of his father's death as in any way suspicious. Everything was as he thought it should be. He has no reason to suspect that Shipman did anything untoward. He told the police that his father died as a result of a long, protracted illness. Dr Grieve had prepared him for his father's death and it was not unexpected. He regards his father's death as having been 'a happy release'.
Mr Lingard was cremated. Mr Lingard's wife, Mrs Emily Lingard, made the application for cremation, completing Form A. She identified Shipman as her husband's ordinary medical attendant and as the doctor who attended him during his last illness. She stated that the death occurred at 8.30pm. However, someone has crossed this time out and has substituted 7.30pm.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He recorded that Mr Lingard died at 7.30pm and that he had been Mr Lingard's ordinary medical attendant for ten months. He had last seen Mr Lingard alive on the day of his death and saw the body almost immediately after death. This gives rise to uncertainty in that it is possible that Shipman had visited very shortly before the death and remained in the house during the death, returning to the bedside almost immediately afterwards to certify the fact of death. Alternatively, Shipman might have been at the house at any time during the day and might have returned when summoned after the death. The Lingards lived very close to the surgery. On Form B, Shipman said that Mrs Emily Lingard had nursed her husband in his last illness and was present at the moment of death.
Mr Lingard's cause of death was said to be chronic bronchiectasis with emphysema, with cor pulmonale as a condition which contributed to the death but which was not directly related to the immediate cause. The mode of death was said to be coma lasting about one hour. These answers were based on his own observations and those of Mrs Emily Lingard. This might suggest that Shipman was in Mr Lingard's presence for at least a part of the period immediately prior to his death.
Dr Stella Brown completed Form C. She said that she saw and questioned Mrs Emily Lingard and was satisfied as to the cause of death stated.
Conclusion
There can be no doubt that Mr Lingard was very ill in the period before his death and his death was expected to follow soon, though not perhaps that day. Shipman visited at some time on the day of the death. We have no evidence of the time that he visited or what, if any, treatment he gave. If Mr Lingard was suffering chest pain, it is possible that Shipman gave him an injection of some kind of sedative or analgesic to ease his pain and distress. As his breathing was poor, even a small amount of any drug that was also a respiratory depressant could have had the effect of hastening Mr Lingard's death. The difficulty is that there is no evidence as to the time of Shipman's visit or as to the nature of any treatment provided.
I regret the evidence is not sufficiently clear for me to say whether Mr Lingard died a natural death or whether his death was hastened by Shipman. I do not doubt that death was imminent. Usually, one would not entertain any suspicion about the actions of a doctor who attended a seriously ill patient on the day of the death. However, Shipman was later to become a serial killer. The contents of Form B, which show that Shipman was present before and immediately after the death, give rise to the suspicion that Shipman might have injected Mr Lingard with a drug supposedly to ease his breathing, but in fact designed to depress his respiration so that he would die.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001