The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Florence Leach
Introduction
Mrs Florence Leach died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Wednesday, 30th
May 1979 at the age of 92. She was a patient of Shipman. Following a post-mortem examination but without an inquest, the South Manchester Coroner certified that the cause of her death was left ventricular failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Thomas Leach (Mrs Leach's son) and Mrs Lilian Stansfield (a member of staff at Charnley House at the time of Mrs Leach's death). The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1979 and the Charnley House daily diaries and admissions register. The Inquiry has also obtained reports from Dr John Grenville and Professor Helen Whitwell.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Leach was a widow who had lived alone for about 20 years until she first moved to Charnley House, following a fall, some time in 1977. She did not enjoy Charnley House and, after six months, left to live with her daughter. She stayed with her daughter, who was by that time quite elderly, for only three or four months before returning to Charnley House in November 1978.
Mr Leach recalls that, when he visited his mother some weeks before her death, she was suffering from a swollen neck, which had to be bandaged. According to the Report of Death to the Coroner, Mrs Leach was seen by doctors on account of this swelling four weeks before her death. Initially she was seen by Shipman, who called in Dr Kenyon, a consultant at Ashton-under-Lyne General Hospital. Dr Kenyon visited on 18th
May 1979 but could find no cause for the swelling and suggested antibiotics. Shipman visited on 21st
May and left a prescription, presumably for the antibiotics suggested by Dr Kenyon. That evening, Mrs Leach was noted to be bringing up blood. On 22nd
May 1979, Mrs Leach could not swallow her antibiotics and so Shipman left a prescription for antibiotic injections. It is recorded in the Medical History in a Case of Sudden Death form from the coroner's papers that Mrs Leach was receiving Penbritin injections
'for use as an anti-biotic'
and Dr Grenville has confirmed that Penbritin is indeed an injectable antibiotic. Such injections were apparently usually administered either by the resident's own general practitioner, in this case Shipman, or by a qualified nurse at the home, usually Mr Lanceley.
The daily diaries are self-explanatory and record Mrs Leach's gradual deterioration over the days before her death.
Mr Leach visited his mother about a week before she died and says that she was her 'usual alert self'. He recalls that she was able to walk about and was well, apart from the bandage around her neck.
The Day of the Death
Mr Leach recalls that, on Wednesday, 30th
May, he received a telephone call from a member of staff at Charnley House who said that he and his sisters should come to see their mother. When he arrived, he was shocked to find that his mother's condition had deteriorated greatly. She was bedridden and appeared to be very tired and drowsy, in Mr Leach's words, 'as if she had been given an injection'. Mrs Leach was barely able to speak, although she did at one point ask to be turned over. Mr Leach and his sisters remained with their mother for about 15 minutes. A nurse then took them downstairs where they waited a further 15 minutes before being advised to leave. About half an hour later, Mr Leach and his sisters were told that their mother had died.
The morning report for 30th
May 1979 in the Charnley House daily diary records:
'Mrs Leach continues to deteriorate all care & attention given. L.S.'
.
There then appears a further entry:
'Mrs Leach, passed peacefully away 2 p.m.
Dr Shipman confirmed Death 2-15pm (coroner P.M. informed)
Relatives informed. L.S.'
.
The two entries were made by Mrs Stansfield. On reading those entries, Mrs Stansfield infers that Mrs Leach must have been at the point of death at the end of the morning shift. In those circumstances, she would not have left the home but would have remained to give Mrs Leach what care and comfort she could. Mrs Stansfield considers that her experience of working with the elderly enabled her to anticipate with reasonable accuracy when an elderly resident might die.
Mrs Stansfield noted that Shipman attended at the home but that the time when he did so is not recorded. She says that it was standard practice at the home to telephone the doctor immediately after death, in order for death to be confirmed. Mrs Stansfield says that, as the Donneybrook Surgery was very close, it would be possible to telephone Shipman just after 2pm and for him to arrive within a few minutes. Having read the entries for the fortnight before Mrs Leach's death, Mrs Stansfield is of the opinion that, because Mrs Leach's condition was gradually deteriorating and she was dying, she would not have called Shipman out unless Mrs Leach was in pain or distress. There would have been nothing he could do for her. Mrs Stansfield says that she thinks Shipman probably arrived at the home after Mrs Leach died, but it is possible that he was on the premises when she died.
The Report of Sudden Death and the Medical History in a Case of Sudden Death, from the coroner's papers, both record that Mrs Leach died at 1.50pm on 30th
May. The Report of Death to the Coroner records that she died at 2pm. Importantly, in the Report of Sudden Death, in answer to question 13 (as to whether the deceased was seen by a doctor whilst living or after death), it is recorded:
'after death at Charnley House by Dr Shipman'
. That would support Mrs Stansfield's view that Shipman did not see Mrs Leach on the day of her death until after she had died.
The Post-Mortem Examination
A post-mortem examination was carried out by Dr A S Day on 31st
May 1979. On internal examination, both lungs were noted to be congested and showed oedema in their basal regions. The coronary vessels and aorta showed moderate to severe grades of atheromatous changes.
There is no reference at all to the swelling on Mrs Leach's neck which had given rise to the supposed need for antibiotic therapy. Nor is any focus of infection revealed.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville comments that the history suggests that Mrs Leach's condition deteriorated gradually. He also observes that there is no evidence that Shipman administered an injection shortly before Mrs Leach's death.
Dr Grenville said that he did not understand why Mrs Leach's death was reported to the coroner or why a post-mortem examination was held. He could only think that Shipman wanted to have the cause of death elucidated. It seems to me very likely that he wanted to know the nature of the swelling on Mrs Leach's neck and the cause of producing blood. Dr Grenville noted that, whilst the post-mortem examination revealed sufficient coronary artery disease to account for death, it did not reveal proof that it was actually the cause of death. He noted the absence of any reference to the swelling in the neck or any explanation for the fact that antibiotics had been prescribed.
Dr Grenville concluded that Mrs Leach probably died of natural causes, but said that the actual cause of her death remains a mystery.
Professor Whitwell noted that Mrs Leach had ischaemic heart disease due to coronary artery atheroma. She said that ischaemic heart disease is a chronic condition and observed that in this case there were no pathological features enabling her to say that death occurred as a result of the ischaemic heart disease. Professor Whitwell concluded that it was impossible to say whether or not a noxious substance had been administered prior to death.
Conclusion
It seems to me clear that Mrs Leach died of natural causes but what the cause was is not known.
Mrs Leach's health deteriorated in the days before her death. The deterioration seems to have been related to the development of a swelling in the neck and the production of blood either from the lungs or throat. The nature of the swelling was not understood by the treating doctor and it would appear that Mrs Leach continued to deteriorate despite the administration of antibiotics, first taken orally and then, when Mrs Leach could no longer swallow, by injection. Her death on 30th
May was neither sudden nor unexpected. However, in the light of the recent history, it is not surprising that Shipman would wish to discover the nature of the unidentified pathology.
It may be that the pathologist who carried out the post-mortem examination was unaware of the recent history of Mrs Leach's deterioration or her treatment. He did not note any abnormal findings in the region of the neck. It is not clear how detailed an examination he made. He found a sufficient degree of atheroma in the cardiac vessels to explain the death. Many people have similar degrees of change but do not die of them. The pathologist did not find, or did not note, any signs which would suggest that the death had in fact been due to those atheromatous changes. His conclusion that death was due to left ventricular failure related to ischaemic heart disease might or might not have been correct.
Whatever the cause of death, there is no evidence to suggest that Shipman caused or hastened it. The mere fact that Shipman referred the death to the coroner would indicate that he had nothing to hide. The evidence suggests that he had not seen Mrs Leach for several days before her death. There is no positive evidence to suggest that he was at the home immediately before the death. It is possible that he was and that he remained on the premises until the death had occurred.
Taking the evidence as a whole, it seems highly likely that Mrs Leach died a natural death. I cannot rule out the possibility that Shipman was involved but it is very unlikely.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001