The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Laura Frances Linn
Introduction
Mrs Laura Frances Linn died at her home, 5 Acorn Avenue, Gee Cross, Hyde on Friday, 13th
February 1998 at the age of 83. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977, and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of her death was left ventricular failure due to ischaemic heart disease due to hypertension.
The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs Linn's death was one of a number recovered by the police from the register office in August 1998 and, after a preliminary assessment, the police decided to investigate the death. They took statements from Mr Ronald Linn (one of Mrs Linn's sons) and Dr Alan Banks. A report from Dr John Grenville was obtained. Detective Sergeant John Ashley produced a statement following his interrogation of the Market Street Surgery computer. Telephone billing records for 5 Acorn Avenue were obtained. The police interviewed Mrs Linn's husband, Mr George Linn, but no statement was taken from him.
It should be emphasised that until his death in spring 2002, Mr George Linn retained a high opinion of Shipman even after he was convicted of 15 murders. Mr Ronald Linn says that his father would not give a statement to the police and that his father's attitude effectively precluded discussion within the family of Shipman's possible involvement in Mrs Linn's death. When Mr Ronald Linn made his brief police statement, he said that there were no concerns about his mother's death and her treatment by Shipman.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Linn but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry obtained a further statement from Dr Banks. Following the death of Mr George Linn, a further witness statement was taken from Mr Ronald Linn and witness statements were taken from Mr lan Linn (Mr Ronald Linn's brother) and Mrs Nellie Rook (a neighbour and family friend of Mr George Linn and his wife). The family had previously expressed a desire not to be involved in the Inquiry's investigations.
The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Linn's general practitioner and hospital records, and to appointments sheets, visits books, the medical representatives diary, and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr and Mrs Linn were both retired. For some time before her death, Mrs Linn had been in poor health. For several years, she was treated for hypothyroidism, iron deficiency anaemia and high blood pressure. She underwent cataract operations in 1996 and 1997. In 1997, she began to suffer from chronic obstructive airways disease (COAD), which is also known as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This took the form of chronic bronchitis and late-onset asthma.
On 24th
December 1997, Mrs Linn was admitted to Tameside General Hospital because of an exacerbation of her COAD. An x-ray taken on 23rd
December 1997 appeared to demonstrate cardiac enlargement as well as COAD. Mrs Linn was discharged three days later but was readmitted with a recurrence of symptoms on 4th
January 1998, this time remaining in hospital for five days.
During the early hours of 23rd
January 1998, Mrs Linn was again admitted to hospital. She had suffered a severe heart attack and was found to be in respiratory failure and left ventricular failure. She went into cardiogenic shock, which is a critical condition. She was given emergency treatment and was discharged on 10th
February. On discharge, she was prescribed a variety of different drugs for her respiratory problems and others for the cardiac condition. The report of an echocardiogram sent to Shipman on 16th
February, that is three days after her death, reveals that her heart was in a very poor condition.
There is an entry in the surgery visits book for 10th
February 1998 as follows:
'Laura Linn - just out of hosp. Not feeling too well'
.
There is no record of a visit in the computerised medical records for that date, although there is a record of a patient review on 11th
February 1998 at which Mrs Linn's recent cardiac problems and medication needs were noted. Mr Ronald Linn spoke to her that night and says that her mood was 'chirpy', taking into account the circumstances.
The Day of the Death
Mr George Linn's account of events is contained within the police report. On the day of her death Mrs Linn awoke feeling unwell. She telephoned Shipman's surgery to request a visit. The telephone billing records confirm that a call was made at 8.22am, lasting 18 seconds, and a second call at 8.30am, lasting one minute and 34 seconds. During one or both of these calls a visit was requested. Within Mrs Linn's Lloyd George notes is a visit request slip dated 13th
February 1998, recording that she was breathless. The message was noted at 8.30am. In response to the question whether the patient could get down to the surgery, the answer
'no'
is circled. The surgery computer records at least one telephone conversation between Shipman and Mrs Linn or her husband. An entry created at 8.35am on 13th
February reads as follows:
'13/02/98 / / 8CB
Had a chat to patient
lasix 1 now and 1 hr visit after surgery'
.
A further entry also made at 8.35am simply records:
'Telephone encounter'
.
There is an entry in the visits book for 13th
February, also recording that Mrs Linn was breathless. It appears that these early morning conversations did not convey to Shipman or his staff that Mrs Linn needed to see a doctor as a matter of emergency. Shipman's advice was that Mrs Linn should take one Lasix tablet immediately and another tablet one hour later. He said that he would visit after morning surgery. Lasix is the proprietary name for frusemide, a diuretic which relieves the breathlessness resulting from left ventricular failure.
When Shipman had not visited Mrs Linn by 10.44am, Mr Linn telephoned the surgery again requesting a visit. Shipman arrived shortly after 11am. Mrs Linn died between 15 and 20 minutes after Shipman's arrival. Mr Linn said that he was at his wife's side throughout Shipman's visit. He expressed no concern about Shipman's involvement in his wife's death and believed that she died from a heart attack. Mr Linn never divulged what occurred during the 15 to 20 minute period whilst Shipman was at the house.
Mrs Rook says that she was at home shortly after 11am when Shipman came to her house and asked her to sit with Mr George Linn because his wife had just died. He then returned to the Linns' house. Mrs Rook went to the Linns' house and found Mr George Linn very distressed. His wife was lying in bed in the living room with a sheet pulled up to her neck. Her face was very pale and she looked quite peaceful. Mr George Linn apparently said what a good doctor Shipman was. Shipman seemed anxious and said that he was awaiting a call from Mr Ronald Linn. When Mr Ronald Linn telephoned shortly, afterwards, there was probably a brief conversation as to the timing of events before Shipman then left. After the undertakers attended and after Mr George Linn had time to compose himself, he apparently told Mrs Rook that he made three calls to Shipman that morning. During the first call, he had told Mr Linn to give his wife a tablet and to call back half an hour later. When Mr Linn called back, Shipman asked if Mrs Linn had 'gone'. When Mr Linn said that she was still alive, Shipman repeated his initial advice. In a third call, according to Mrs Rook, Mr Linn informed Shipman that his wife had died. He told Mrs Rook that his wife had been quite lively the previous evening.
The facts suggested by Mrs Rook's recollection do not coincide with what the family remember that they were told about the events of that morning. Mrs Rook herself remembers that at some time after Mrs Linn's death, Mr Ronald Linn's wife had said that she understood Shipman to have given an injection that morning. Moreover, both Mr Ronald Linn and Mr lan Linn give evidence that supports that suggestion.
Mr Ronald Linn says that his brother telephoned him at about 10am. He understood from what his brother said, that his father had made contact earlier that morning only with the receptionist and not with Shipman himself. In the light of the apparently genuine computerised entry for 8.35am, I think that must be wrong. Mr Ronald Linn says that he telephoned his father at about noon. His father told him that Shipman was still at the house and had given Mrs Linn 'something'; he took that to mean that Shipman had given an injection. Mr George Linn said that he, that is Mr George Linn, was not able speak to his wife and Mr Ronald Linn assumed that that was because she was unconscious. Shipman then came to the telephone and told Mr Ronald Linn that his mother was very ill and probably would not live very much longer. He also said that he had 'just given her something'. Mr Ronald Linn told his father to ask Mrs Rook to go to the house. Mr Ronald Linn then put the telephone down and learned from his brother, who called about 30 minutes later, that his mother had died. Mr George Linn told him later that day that Shipman had arrived at the house and had helped to put Mrs Linn on the bed. Mr Ronald Linn assumed from this that his mother had collapsed before Shipman arrived. He remembers that his father told him that Shipman had said that they should not call an ambulance, and that his father had agreed with that advice. It seems to me that that conversation probably took place not over the telephone first thing that morning but face to face later that day.
Mr lan Linn remembers that he telephoned the surgery just before 9am that morning, because he was concerned to know his mother's prognosis. He was not put through to Shipman but the receptionist said that his father had already called and that Shipman was going to visit his mother later that morning. This prompted Mr Ian Linn to telephone his parents' house, although he recalls that he did not do so until some time between 11am and 11.15am. Shipman answered the telephone and explained that he had been called out, that Mrs Linn was not well and was 'blue' when he arrived. He said that he was going to give her an injection. Mr Ian Linn says that Shipman did not specify the nature of the injection but that he assumed that it was an injection of morphine 'or possibly a relaxant'. He asked whether his mother was dying and Shipman said words to the effect that Mr lan Linn knew what he was saying. Mr lan Linn thought that Shipman was being careful with his words because he did not want to upset Mr George Linn further, who could be heard crying in the background. Shipman told Mr Ian Linn to call back 15 to 20 minutes later. Mr lan Linn telephoned his brother and informed him of the situation. When he telephoned his parents' home, as requested by Shipman, Shipman answered the telephone and said that Mrs Linn had died. Mr Ian Linn arrived at his parents' house later that evening. His father told him that after the initial call or calls to the surgery, he had become increasingly worried about his wife's condition and that he wanted to call an ambulance. Mrs Linn, however, said that she did not want an ambulance and that she wanted to wait for Shipman.
Mr lan Linn understood that Shipman was doing his best to help Mrs Linn by ensuring that she passed away peacefully. He still believes that Shipman was only doing his best to make sure that his mother did not suffer any unnecessary pain.
The Inquiry has contacted the Greater Manchester Ambulance Service and following a search of the paramedic emergency control records, it has been confirmed that no request for an ambulance to attend at the Linn household was made on 13th
February 1998.
The penultimate entry in the computerised medical records, created at 1.11pm on the same day reads as follows:
'13/02/98 / / 22J
O/E - dead
11.30 husband present Ivf ihd coad'
.
A number of entries have been removed from the surgery computer, although their removal does not give rise to suspicion. The first is an entry recording acute myocardial infarction that was created on 12th
February 1998 at 12.07pm and removed on 20th
February 1998 at 11.06am. That entry referred to the heart attack Mrs Linn suffered on 23rd
January 1998, as documented in the discharge summary. Another entry in the same terms, simply adding a reference number, was added at the same time as the removal. Three further records were removed but these were not significant and were probably routine entries.
In his statement to the police, dated 15th
October 1998, Dr Banks said:
'The history and hospital admission immediately prior to death confirm the possible cause of death as Left Ventricle Failure.
It should be noted however, that immediately prior to her death she was given an injection of “Frusemide” an appropriate treatment for Heart Failure. I cannot confirm from the records whether or not Frusemide was actually given'.
There is no record of an injection having been given in any of the medical records available to the Inquiry. Dr Banks was asked to clarify the basis upon which he noted that an injection of frusemide had been given immediately prior to death. In his statement to the Inquiry, dated 19th
November 2001, Dr Banks described his earlier statement as:
'an accurate reflection of my interpretation of the records in my possession at that time. This was the only occasion upon which I commented that Shipman gave an injection immediately prior to death.
I recollect that when I examined the GP medical records, for the purposes of making the statement on 15th
October 1998 I read a hand written note in Shipman's handwriting which stated that he had given an injection of frusemide immediately prior to death. I remember that the note was written as a single entry on a separate continuation card in fairly large handwriting, at the top of the card with the writing sloping across the card. In my statement I have referred to “Frusemide” with the words in quotation marks. This indicates to me that this is a direct quotation from that entry.
I have recently re-examined the GP medical records, contained in the Lloyd George folder. However I have not been able to locate the continuation card which contains the entry referred to above. I can only assume that the card has been mislaid'
.
It would appear that if this continuation card did exist and has been mislaid, it was already missing by the time Professor Richard Baker considered the medical records in the year 2000. Certainly there is no reference in the existing records, either written or computerised, to any injection having been given to Mrs Linn on the day of her death. The only reference to any drug being prescribed is that Shipman appears to have suggested to Mr George Linn that Mrs Linn take two of her Lasix (frusemide) tablets that morning.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and said that he had last seen Mrs Linn alive on the day of her death. The cause of death was stated to be left ventricular failure due to ischaemic heart disease due to hypertension. COAD had contributed to the death. The left ventricular failure was said to have come on either three hours or three days before the death. The entry has been changed but remains obscure.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. The time of death is given as 11.30am. Shipman said that he had attended Mrs Linn during her last illness for 15 minutes. That illness can only have been left ventricular failure and its suggested duration differs from the timings on the MCCD. Shipman said that he saw her immediately before death and was present with Mr George Linn at the moment of death. The cause of death was as on the MCCD. The mode of death was said to be syncope of only minutes' duration. Shipman said that his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and the statements of Mr Linn.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker concluded that on the basis of the cremation forms there was a high degree of suspicion that Shipman unlawfully killed Mrs Linn. He considered the medical records separately, and concluded on the basis of their contents that the death was moderately suspicious. He commented as follows:
'There is a reasonable case for death due to acute LVF and IHD; however, the records are so brief that judgement is difficult. If the patient had terminal LVF, more vigorous treatment might have been expected - IV lasix etc. An additional acute event may have occurred when the patient returned home, but we are given no details'
.
It does now appear that
'an additional acute event'
did occur, and that it occurred on the day of Mrs Linn's death.
Dr Grenville considered the medical records and the documentary evidence in this case. He noted the history, particularly Mrs Linn's admission to hospital at the end of 1997, her first readmission in January 1998, and the heart attack on 23rd
January 1998. He noted the advice given by Shipman over the telephone that Mrs Linn should take further Lasix to treat her breathlessness and commented that Shipman would have acted appropriately in giving such advice.
Dr Grenville noted that Shipman had not provided a record of Mrs Linn's clinical details, or any treatment administered. Despite this, he concluded that it was quite likely that Mrs Linn had developed further left ventricular failure, which proved fatal. Given the history, the death was not unexpected. Dr Grenville said that from a medical point of view, the death was not suspicious.
Conclusion
There can be no doubt that Mrs Linn was very unwell and at grave risk of suffering a sudden cardiac death. Her death was not unexpected. The little we know about her condition on the morning of the day of her death suggests that she was experiencing breathlessness prior to Shipman's arrival. This is consistent with the onset of an acute episode of left ventricular failure and the fact that Mr George Linn wanted to call an ambulance and actually called the surgery a second or third time at about 10.44am, would suggest that he was very anxious about his wife's condition.
It seems to me, however, to be more than a coincidence that Mrs Linn survived until Shipman arrived but succumbed very shortly after his arrival. During that period, Shipman did not summon an ambulance. Even though it does appear that Mrs Linn did not want an ambulance to be called, I think it more likely that she expressed that wish before Shipman arrived rather than afterwards. I suspect that Shipman did not want to call an ambulance and had decided that the most appropriate course was to end her life as swiftly as possible. It is theoretically possible that he discussed the issue of resuscitation and hospital admission sensitively and appropriately with the Linns. I have difficulty in accepting that he did because I think that any advice he gave was probably distorted by his own perception of what was best for Mrs Linn. By February 1998, Shipman had unlawfully killed a very large number of patients, many in the preceding 12 months. Dr Banks' recollection is that the Lloyd George notes recorded that an injection of frusemide had been administered and I think it likely that he did indeed see that record. I believe, however, that Shipman did not give an injection of frusemide at all. I believe that he gave an injection of morphine or diamorphine and I believe that he did so not primarily to relieve Mrs Linn's pain but in order to hasten her death. If an injection of frusemide were to have been given, it would be surprising if death followed as quickly as it apparently did. If diamorphine were given, death would follow rapidly, as it apparently did. The totality of the evidence from several sources causes me to accept that an injection was given, contrary to what is suggested by the evidence of Mrs Rook.
Mrs Linn would have been a typical Shipman victim in many respects. She was in poor health and it would have been entirely in keeping with his philosophy if Shipman had decided that it was time to let Mrs Linn go.
I have come to the conclusion that it is probable that Shipman injected Mrs Linn with diamorphine, under the pretence of giving frusemide. It is quite possible that Mrs Linn would have died on that day or shortly afterwards in any event. However, I think that Shipman probably decided that she was to die that day and ensured that result by giving her diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001