The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Elsie Lewis
Introduction
Mrs Elsie Lewis died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Thursday, 16th
July 1981 at the age of 88. She had probably been a patient of Shipman for about three and a half years. He certified that the cause of her death was senility.
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs Lewis, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, the cremation forms, Shipman's visits book for 1981 and the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
Mrs Lewis was admitted to Charnley House on 21st
February 1972 and had been a resident there for nine years at the time of her death. The daily diary for the weeks leading up to her death shows that she was very poorly. It seems likely that she suffered from oedema of the legs, which was probably a sign of heart failure. On Wednesday, 1st
July 1981, the nursing staff decided that Mrs Lewis' legs should be elevated, and when Shipman attended to see her on the following day, he approved that treatment.
On 7th
July 1981, Shipman saw Mrs Lewis again but did not prescribe any medication. She was not well and her relatives were told of her condition, which was giving rise to some concern.
Mrs Lewis was seen again by Shipman on the afternoon of Monday, 13th
July 1981. It is noted that she had a swollen gland, although again, he prescribed no treatment.
In addition to these specific complaints, the daily diary shows that Mrs Lewis was in need of extensive care from the staff at the home. She was confined to bed and her appetite was very poor.
The night report of the daily diary for Wednesday, 15th
July 1981 records that Mrs Lewis died at 7.15am, which would be the morning of Thursday, 16th
July. Later that morning, Shipman was at the home and appears to have certified the cause of her death. The daily diary suggests that another doctor also saw her body.
Shipman's visits book for 1981 records the visits for 2nd
and 13th
July, but it contains no mention of the visit of 7th
July, although the name of another resident at Charnley House does appear on that date. On 16th
July, Mrs Lewis' name is the fifth in a list of nine names. It seems clear that Shipman was called out to certify the cause of her death and not to see her when she was alive.
Certification
Shipman signed the MCCD counterfoil on 16th
July 1981. He said that he had last seen Mrs Lewis alive on 14th
July. This appears to be an error, as his visit on 13th
July is well documented and there is no record of a visit the following day.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that he had attended Mrs Lewis during her last illness for three and a half years. If he did so, then the time when he started seeing her would roughly coincide with his arrival in Hyde in October 1977. Shipman said, quite possibly correctly, that he had last seen Mrs Lewis alive approximately 48 hours before her death. He said that he saw her body four hours after her death and that he made a complete external examination of it. The mode of death was said to be coma lasting 24 hours and, again, this broadly fits with the picture painted by the daily diary. Shipman's answers in relation to cause and mode of death were said to be based on statements made by the staff at Charnley House, including statements made by the owner, Mrs Winifred Lanceley. Shipman said that the staff at Charnley House had nursed Mrs Lewis. He said that no one had been present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker examined the cremation certificate and considered that the entries did not give rise to suspicion.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Lewis died a natural death. It is clear from the daily diary that her condition had declined gradually to the stage where her death was expected.
There is no evidence that Shipman had access to her in the hours before her death. The evidence suggests that he last saw her alive on 13th
July.
There is no cause to suspect that Shipman was involved in Mrs Lewis' death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001