The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Olive Lees
Introduction
Miss Olive Lees died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Sunday, 17th
March 1985 at the age of 81. She had probably been a patient of Shipman while resident in Charnley House for about 16 months before her death. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
The Inquiry has taken a witness statement from Miss Lees' nephew, Mr Philip Pardoe. The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, the cremation certificate, Shipman's visits book for 1985, the duty doctor transfer diary and the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Lees was a retired insurance agent. She was admitted to Charnley House on 11th
November 1983 from her home in Dukinfield after she had begun to exhibit increasingly disturbed behaviour. Mr Pardoe was her nearest surviving relative and he visited her relatively infrequently. He believes that she registered with Shipman on her admission to Charnley House.
Miss Lees was clearly quite unwell in the weeks leading up to her death. In particular, she suffered from swelling and discoloration of her legs. Whether this was a manifestation of congestive heart failure or peripheral vascular disease cannot be known in the absence of medical records. The staff arranged for her legs to be elevated. Shipman saw Miss Lees on Tuesday, 5th
March 1985 and said that he was pleased with her condition, as her legs were less swollen than on his previous visit. He said that the staff should not worry if her legs were seen to be discoloured again.
On Wednesday, 6th
March, Miss Lees was said to be warm and flushed. She may have been suffering from a fever.
On Thursday, 14th
March, Miss Lees was seen again by Shipman. On this occasion, he said that there was nothing to be done for her. She was to be given
'TLC'
, which means 'tender loving care'. The visit appears in Shipman's visits book as well as in the Charnley House daily diary. There is a note for the evening report of that day that Miss Lees' nephew was to telephone the home with some personal details relevant to Miss Lees. That night, Miss Lees took no fluids but her mouth was kept moist. Mr Pardoe remembers that he was informed at about this time of the deterioration in his aunt's condition. When he visited her, he realised that she was extremely poorly and her breathing was 'atrocious'. She could not recognise him.
On Friday, 15th
March, Miss Lees' condition remained very poor. She was turned regularly. She took only small amounts of fluid but her mouth was kept moist. Her condition did not improve on the following day.
The Day of the Death
The first entry for Sunday, 17th
March 1985 records that there was no change in Miss Lees'
'very poorly condition'
.
The afternoon and evening report records as follows:
'Mrs Lees. Passed peacefully away 2.45pm. Dr came
at 3.30pm unable to sign death certificate as
he is Dr Shipmans partner and it isn't allowed and
Dr Shipman has got to see the body himself. (TOMORROW AT
KENWORTHYS, ASHTON).
All details attended to. Relatives informed'
.
It seems clear that Shipman did not see Miss Lees on that day. There is no record of a visit in his visits book or in the Charnley House daily diary. According to the duty doctor transfer diary, Dr Bennett was on duty that weekend pursuant to the rota for out of hours cover between the Donneybrook doctors. It is likely that it was Dr Bennett who attended at 3.30pm that day.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD on Monday, 18th
May. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman wrote that the cause of death was old age and that congestive heart failure had contributed to the death. He said that he had last seen Miss Lees alive on 15th
March, which was the Friday before her death. He said that he had seen the body after the death and that there would be no post-mortem examination. There is no record of a visit by Shipman to Charnley House on 15th
March either in his own visits book or in the Charnley House daily diary. However, since there are clear records of a visit on 14th
March, it is likely that Shipman made an error.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Miss Lees died at 2.30pm on 17th
March 1985, which broadly corresponds with the entry in the Charnley House daily diary. He said that he had been Miss Lees' ordinary medical attendant for 15 months. He said that he had attended her during her last illness for four months.
Shipman said on Form B that he had last seen Miss Lees alive two days before her death, which would seem to repeat the error he made on the MCCD counterfoil. He probably completed both documents at the same time.
Shipman said that Miss Lees was in a coma for more than 24 hours before her death and this is consistent with the record in the Charnley House daily diary. Shipman said that his answers were based on statements made by the staff at Charnley House who nursed Miss Lees during her final illness and were present at her death.
There is nothing sinister in any entry on Form B.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Miss Lees died a natural death. She had been in poor health for some time and the Charnley House daily diary records her gradual decline. Her death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
There is no evidence that Shipman had access to Miss Lees on the day of her death. He was almost certainly not on duty. His last visit to Miss Lees was probably on 14th
March, three days before the death.
There is no cause to suspect an unnatural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001