The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Thomas Alfred Longmate
Introduction
Mr Thomas Alfred Longmate died at his home, 9 Gresham Street, Denton on Wednesday, 6th
September 1978 at the age of 69. He had probably been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was coronary thrombosis and that multiple sclerosis had contributed to the death.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Longmate's daughter, Mrs Doris Forrester. The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil. Mr Longmate's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
At the time of his death, Mr Longmate lived with his second wife, who has since died.
Mrs Forrester recalls that her father always had a bad limp, although this did not prevent him from working as a lorry driver. She also recalls that he suffered from angina and that, on at least one occasion, he complained of bad chest pain. She says that her father was found to have multiple sclerosis about two to three years before his death. Following this diagnosis, his health gradually deteriorated, he lost co-ordination and had to use a wheelchair. His bed was moved downstairs. A district nurse would visit him every evening and would put him to bed using a lifting harness.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of 6th
September 1978, Mr Longmate was taken to Manchester Royal Infirmary for a routine check-up. During the journey home in the ambulance, he had a 'turn' and was taken back to hospital. Following examination, he was allowed to return home.
In the late afternoon or early evening, Mrs Forrester received a telephone call from her stepmother who said that there was 'something wrong' with her husband. Mrs Forrester and her husband went to her father's house. She found her father sitting in a chair. He was trying to chew some food but was having difficulty in doing so. He was sweating profusely. Soon afterwards, the district nurse arrived for her usual evening visit. She telephoned for a doctor. Whilst waiting for the doctor to arrive, Mrs Forrester sat with Mr Longmate and held his hand. He was unable to speak and was obviously ill. She recalls that he asked her to stand near to the door so that he could see her.
Shipman attended and Mrs Forrester thinks that he went into her father's bedroom alone, although it is possible that the district nurse accompanied him. Mrs Forrester cannot now remember for how long Shipman was with her father, but eventually he emerged and said words to the effect that Mr Longmate had suffered a 'massive coronary' and had died.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman said that Mr Longmate died at home of a coronary thrombosis on 6th
September 1978. He said that he had last seen Mr Longmate alive on the day of the death. He had examined the body after death. There would not be a post-mortem examination. The counterfoil is dated 7th
September 1978.
There are no cremation documents.
Conclusion
The evidence suggests that Mr Longmate was unwell on 6th
September and that the district nurse called Shipman out in an emergency. Although Mrs Forrester does not mention that her father complained of chest pain, she does say that he was sweating profusely and it is quite possible that he had suffered a heart attack.
The fact that Shipman was present at the moment of death excites a degree of suspicion that he might have caused the death. It is not known whether Shipman attempted to treat Mr Longmate in any way. If Mr Longmate were in pain or distress, it might have been appropriate for Shipman to give a small dose of a pain-relieving drug, such as diamorphine. If that were to be done, the injection should be given slowly and the process should be stopped as soon as the pain was relieved. If too much were given or if the dose were to be given too quickly, it might cause respiratory depression and death. It is not known whether the district nurse was present during the consultation. If she was, it might seem unlikely that Shipman would have attempted anything unlawful. If she was not present, it is entirely possible that he might have given an inappropriately large dose, with fatal consequences. I stress that there is no evidence that Shipman did this, but the possibility cannot be ruled out.
I regret to say that I am unable to decide whether Mr Longmate died a natural death or whether Shipman did something to cause or hasten the death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001