The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The First Report
>
Alphabetical List of Cases
>
Beatrice Lowe
Introduction
Mrs Beatrice Lowe died at her home, 34 Baron Road, Hyde on Wednesday, 17th
October 1984 at the age of 88. She was a patient of Dr Moysey who practised from the same surgery as Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of Mrs Lowe's death was old age.
The only information which the Inquiry initially had about this death was the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), which named Mrs Lowe's nephew, Mr Brian Rodney Orpet, as the informant. The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Orpet and from Mrs Marjorie Lowe, who is the wife of another of Mrs Lowe's nephews. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1984 and the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). The medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Lowe was a widow and lived alone at the time of her death. According to her family, she was a lively and gregarious person. She was very close to her niece, Mr Orpet's sister. When her niece died in early 1984, she lost interest in people and became rather depressed.
Mrs Lowe had enjoyed quite good health until her late seventies, when she began to suffer from rheumatism in her hands and knees. Eventually, this condition confined her to the house. She could not manage the stairs. Her bed was moved downstairs and a commode was provided.
Mrs Marjorie Lowe used to visit Mrs Lowe every day and would assist her with the household chores. She recalls that, in the last few weeks of her life, Mrs Lowe's health deteriorated and she spent increasing periods of time in bed.
Mr Orpet visited his aunt on Sunday, 14th
October 1984 to find that she had taken to her bed. She seemed to be in a low mood and was not her usual self. Mr Orpet was so concerned about his aunt that he visited her again the following day. He again found her in bed and she slept for most of his visit. A doctor was called out and, as Dr Moysey was not available, Shipman came. He arrived at some time between 2pm and 2.30pm. Mr Orpet left him alone with Mrs Lowe to conduct an examination. After he had finished, Shipman told Mr Orpet that he thought Mrs Lowe was 'not in a very good way'. Mr Orpet interpreted this to mean that Shipman thought she was going to die soon. Mr Orpet recalls that Shipman then looked at him intently and said that he was giving Mrs Lowe something that would 'help her'. Mr Orpet cannot now remember whether Shipman said he had already given some medication to Mrs Lowe or whether he issued a prescription for Mr Orpet to collect. Mr Orpet recalls that, when he left, his aunt was sleeping and that a neighbour stayed in the house.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Marjorie Lowe and Mr Orpet have rather different recollections of the day of Mrs Lowe's death.
Mrs Marjorie Lowe recalls that she visited Mrs Lowe on the morning of Wednesday, 17th
October 1984. She found her lying in bed. She looked very thin and weak. It appeared to Mrs Marjorie Lowe that she was dying. She recalls that, at some time in the late afternoon, she received a telephone call from Mrs Lowe's home help to say that Mrs Lowe had just died.
Mr Orpet recalls that he received a telephone call at about 8am asking him to go to Mrs Lowe's house immediately, as she was dying. He went to the house but by the time he arrived, Mrs Lowe had died. He saw Mrs Lowe lying in bed. She looked very peaceful, as though she had died in her sleep. Mr Orpet telephoned the surgery and, in due course, Shipman arrived. Mr Orpet thinks that this would have been between about 9.30am and 10am. Shipman examined Mrs Lowe briefly and then said that he would certify that the cause of death was 'old age'. He told Mr Orpet that that was now permitted, although at one time it had not been. Mr Orpet was responsible for all the formalities relating to the death.
Mrs Marjorie Lowe recalls that she went back to Mrs Lowe's house in the afternoon after she had been informed of the death. She found the home help at the house. Mrs Lowe looked very peaceful in bed. Shipman was not there. She recalls that Mr Orpet arrived soon afterwards.
The uncertainty about the time of the death is not important and does not affect my decision.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that he had last seen Mrs Lowe alive on 15th October 1984 and that the death occurred on 17th
October. There is no record of Mrs Lowe's name in the visits book for 15th
October but Mr Orpet remembers the visit. Shipman certified that the cause of death was old age.
Conclusion
Although the medical records are no longer available and have probably been destroyed, the witness evidence suggests that Mrs Lowe's health had gradually deteriorated in the months leading up to her death. In the last few weeks of her life she spent most of her time confined to bed. Towards the end, she seems to have slept a great deal. The death was neither sudden nor unexpected. The picture presented by the witness evidence is consistent with the gradual failure of one or more of her vital organs.
There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman saw Mrs Lowe in the hours before her death and I therefore rule out the possibility that Shipman unlawfully killed her by administering a lethal dose of opiates which directly caused her death. However, I cannot rule out the possibility that Shipman administered a sub-lethal dose of opiates or a large dose of a sedative when he visited on 15th
October, two days before Mrs Lowe died. If sedated, Mrs Lowe would be vulnerable to bronchopneumonia, a common mechanism of death in elderly people. If Shipman did this, it would not be possible to say whether he had done it with the intention of keeping Mrs Lowe comfortable or whether he used it as an indirect way of hastening her death.
I regret that I cannot reach a positive decision in this case. There are grounds to suspect that Shipman might have hastened Mrs Lowe's death. All I can say is that it would appear that, if Shipman did hasten Mrs Lowe's end, he shortened her life by only a short period.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001