The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Edith Leech
Introduction
Mrs Edith Leech died at The Sycamores, a residential home for the elderly, Victoria Street, Hyde on Monday, 8th
March 1982 at the age of 83. It appears that she had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was myelofibrosis.
There has been no police investigation and no inquest into Mrs Leech's death.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Jean Foy (Mrs Leech's niece) and from Miss Veronica Jean Foy, Miss Valerie Jeanette Foy and Mrs Denise Huyton (all great-nieces of Mrs Leech). The members of staff of The Sycamores have been unable to provide any relevant additional evidence and the records from the home have not survived. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1982 and the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil. Mrs Leech's medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Leech lived with her husband, Mr William Henry Leech, until his death in February 1982. She had enjoyed reasonably good health until a year or two earlier. The witnesses agree that she then became unwell but the nature of her illness was not known. The younger members of the family suggest that she was suffering from leukaemia but Mrs Foy recalls that her aunt had something wrong with either her spleen or her pancreas, for which she underwent some kind of surgery. She was admitted to hospital on a number of occasions and, on the last such occasion, she had a blood transfusion. Following her final discharge from hospital, Mrs Leech was frail and weak. Mrs Foy visited Mr and Mrs Leech at home each day and would also cook their evening meal, which was delivered by one of Mrs Foy's daughters.
The Events Leading to the Death
On 18th February 1982, Mrs Leech's husband died suddenly and unexpectedly. Shipman arranged for Mrs Leech to be admitted to The Sycamores on the same day. The name
'Leech'
appears in his visits book for that day and alongside appear the letters
'S/S'
, which are probably a reference to Social Services.
Mrs Huyton last visited Mrs Leech at The Sycamores two days before she died. She was up and dressed and was sitting in the television room. She was upset about the loss of her husband but said that it was better that he had pre-deceased her, as he would not have been able to look after himself without her help.
Mrs Foy visited Mrs Leech every other day and must have last seen Mrs Leech alive on 6th
March. Mrs Foy remembers that, during her short stay at The Sycamores, her aunt was always dressed during the day and very chatty. She does not remember any of the members of staff at the home ever expressing any concern as to Mrs Leech's health.
The Day of the Death
On Monday, 8th
March 1982, a member of staff at The Sycamores telephoned Mrs Foy during the afternoon and said that Mrs Leech had died. She was not given any information as to the cause or circumstances of the death. Mrs Foy went immediately to The Sycamores, where she found Mrs Leech laid out on a bed. She has said that 'she didn't look like Aunt Edith as I remembered her at all'. Mrs Foy was shocked by the suddenness of her aunt's death.
Mrs Leech's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book on Monday, 8th
March. The word
'Sycamores'
does, however, appear and alongside it there is some crossed out text as well as the number
'1'
, suggesting that Shipman intended to go to The Sycamores as his first visit that day.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not been recovered, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman said that he had last seen Mrs Leech alive on 24th
February 1982, which is just under two weeks before the death. Mrs Leech's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for that date, although he certainly did see her six days before, on 18th
February 1982, when her husband died. Shipman said that a post-mortem examination would not take place and that he had seen the body after death. The cause of death was certified to be myelofibrosis. That is a chronic disease characterised by fibrosis of the bone marrow. Common features associated with the disease are enlargement of the spleen, which is sometimes removed. The condition often gives rise to the need for blood transfusion. These features coincide, therefore, with Mrs Foy's recollection.
Conclusion
I regret to say that it is not possible for me to say Mrs Leech died as a result of natural causes or alternatively as a result of an unlawful act on the part of Shipman. She was clearly unwell and unable to look after herself. Despite that, the witnesses who saw her in the days before she died remember that she appeared well and say her death was unexpected and came as a shock.
There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman played any part in Mrs Leech's death. The only possible grounds for suspicion are, first, that Mrs Leech's death seemed sudden and unexpected and, second, that although Shipman claimed that he last saw Mrs Leech alive almost two weeks before her death, his visits book suggests that he visited The Sycamores on the day of her death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001