The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Harry Lomas
Introduction
Mr Harry Lomas died at Hyde Nursing Home on Wednesday, 13th
August 1997 at the age of 82. He registered as a patient of Shipman when he moved to Hyde Nursing Home, only a few days before he died. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Lomas' death was carcinoma of the bronchus.
In August 1998, the police investigated all the deaths certified by Shipman in the 12 months prior to the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy. Mr Lomas' death was among them. The police took a statement from Mr Kenneth Hooley, Mr Lomas' brother-in-law.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Lomas but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken generic statements from members of staff from Hyde Nursing Home, but no statements have been taken specifically in respect of the death of Mr Lomas. The Inquiry has had access to Mr Lomas' general practitioner records and the appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also considered the daily evaluation sheets and medical intervention records from Hyde Nursing Home.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
On 2nd
July 1997, Mr Lomas underwent a bronchoscopy at Wythenshawe Hospital, which revealed a carcinoma of the left main bronchus. Dr A M Hilton, a consultant chest physician, advised that the carcinoma was inoperable. After a short stay in Withington Hospital, Mr Lomas was discharged to Hyde Nursing Home on 4th
August 1997 and became registered with Shipman. He had formerly been registered with a doctor in Chorlton-cum-Hardy.
The daily evaluation sheets from Hyde Nursing Home show that, at first, Mr Lomas was happy and comfortable at the home. The medical intervention records show that, on 5th
August, Shipman visited Mr Lomas to assess his condition. This visit is confirmed by Shipman's visits book. The medical records made by Shipman also confirm the visit. Shipman recorded a full 'new patient' examination. It does not appear that Shipman prescribed any opiate-based drug. No further visit was planned. Shipman was to visit 'as needed'. Neither the medical intervention records kept by the home nor Shipman's own records suggest that Shipman saw Mr Lomas again.
Mr Lomas remained quite well until the morning of 12th
August. He reported that he had had a 'tumble' the night before which had 'knocked it out of him'. He stayed on his bed all day and ate very little.
The Day of the Death
The daily evaluation notes record that Mr Lomas slept badly over the night of 12th
to 13th
August. At 5.40am, he was said to be feeling hot and unwell. The curtains were opened in his room to allow more air to circulate. Mr Lomas asked for a drink. At 6.45am, a routine check revealed that he had died. The note records that
'the GP'
had been notified and that he would call in to Hyde Nursing Home on the way to the surgery. Documentation obtained from Healthcall, the deputising service used by Shipman, records that a member of staff at the home telephoned Healthcall at 6.58am to say that Mr Lomas had died. The message was passed to Shipman at 7.06am.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and certified that the cause of death was carcinoma of the bronchus. He said that the approximate interval between the onset and death was six months. He said that he had last seen Mr Lomas alive on 8th
August 1997, that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that he had seen the body after death. The MCCD is dated 13th
August 1997.
Mr Lomas was cremated and Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mr Lomas had died at 6.45am. He said that he had been his ordinary medical attendant for a period of eight days and that he had attended Mr Lomas during his last illness for the same period. He said that he had last seen Mr Lomas alive on 8th
August 1997, five days before death and that he had seen the body one hour after death. The mode of death was said to be syncope lasting minutes. This answer was said to be based on information derived from the staff at the home. Shipman said that the
'sister on duty'
had been present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered Mr Lomas' medical records and cremation forms separately. He concluded that on the basis of both sources of information, the death of Mr Lomas was not suspicious.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mr Lomas died as the result of natural causes, as certified by Shipman.
Mr Lomas was known to be suffering from inoperable cancer at the time of his admission to Hyde Nursing Home on 4th
August 1997. Although he appears to have deteriorated very rapidly, his death could not be described as sudden or unexpected.
The records suggest that Shipman saw Mr Lomas on only one occasion, 5th
August. There is no reason to suppose that Shipman saw Mr Lomas in the hours preceding his death. Indeed it would be most unusual if he had done so, as he would have had to come to the nursing home in the very early morning. I think it is safe to discount that possibility completely.
Shipman claimed to have seen Mr Lomas on 8th
August 1997. There is no note of a visit on that day in the medical records or indeed the medical intervention records. I think it most unlikely that Shipman visited. Shipman was often very careless about his duties in respect of death registration and cremation certification. I think he did not see Mr Lomas on 8th
August. However, the fact that he told a lie or made a mistake on Form B does not imply that he played any sinister part in Mr Lomas' death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001