The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Esther Lowe
Introduction
Mrs Esther Lowe died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Saturday, 22nd
July 1978 at the age of 73. It is not known whether, or for how long, she had been a patient of Shipman but by the time of her death he had been in practice in Hyde for about ten months. He certified that the cause of her death was respiratory failure due to carcinomatosis of unknown origin.
In September 2001, the Inquiry published a list of cases in which the Inquiry had been unable to trace a relative of the deceased. Mrs Lowe's name was on the list. There was no response from anyone who knew her and attempts to trace her next of kin through enquiry agents have proved unsuccessful.
There has been no inquest into the death.
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the Charnley House daily diary and admissions register. Mrs Lowe's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Lowe was admitted to Charnley House on Thursday, 29th
June 1978. She was said to be very sore all over her body and was nursed in a cradle to prevent weight bearing on her legs. On the following day, she was tired and breathless and was still suffering from bedsores. Shipman visited her on 11th
July 1978 and changed her medication, although the daily diary does not say what drugs were prescribed. He saw her again on 14th
July 1978. On 19th
July 1978, Mrs Lowe ate nothing and complained of a sore mouth and throat. By 20th
July, she was described in the daily diary as
'very poorly'
, she had nothing to eat or drink during the day and slept all afternoon. It is recorded in the daily diary for 20th
July that, during the night, Mrs Lowe was given
'all care'
.
It appears that Shipman visited the home on the morning of Friday, 21st
July 1978, but it is not recorded that he had a consultation with Mrs Lowe. Her condition was described as follows:
'No change, taking drinks'
. That night, Mrs Lowe was said to be very confused and was trying to get out of bed.
The Day of the Death
It is recorded in the daily diary for Saturday, 22nd
July 1978 that Mrs Lowe was
'very poorly'
. There is no suggestion that Shipman attended, whether to see Mrs Lowe or any other resident. The evening report states that she died at 4.50pm, that her relatives were informed and that Dr Napier certified her death. Her body was removed by the undertakers at 7.15pm.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman said that Mrs Lowe had died at Charnley House on 22nd
July 1978 and that the cause of death was respiratory failure due to carcinomatosis of unknown origin. He said that he had last seen her alive on 21st
July. He said he had seen the body after death. There would not be a post-mortem examination. The counterfoil was dated 24th
July.
It is possible that Shipman saw Mrs Lowe on 21st
July even though that is not recorded in the daily diary. The daily diary records that Shipman attended the home to visit another resident on that day.
Conclusion
There is no evidence of the nature of Mrs Lowe's illness at the time of her admission to Charnley House. However, it is clear from the daily diary that she was in very poor health. The night before her death she was very confused. On the morning of 22nd
July, she was said to be
'very poorly'
. It would appear that her death that day was neither sudden nor unexpected.
There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman visited Mrs Lowe on the day of her death. Although it was Shipman's practice to carry out routine visits on Saturday mornings, he did not usually do so on Saturday afternoons. It appears that Dr Napier was probably the Donneybrook doctor on out of hours duty that weekend. It is therefore extremely unlikely that Shipman would have visited Mrs Lowe on the afternoon of 22nd
July.
In these circumstances, I feel able to say that I am sure that Mrs Lowe's death was due to natural causes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001