The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
William Henry Leech
Introduction
Mr William Henry Leech died at his home, 13 Plain Pitt Street, Hyde on Thursday, 18th
February 1982 at the age of 84. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Leech's death was senility.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed an advertisement in a number of newspapers, publishing a list of cases in which the Inquiry had only limited information as to the circumstances of the death and in which no relatives had been traced. The names of Mr Leech and his wife, Mrs Edith Leech, who died on Monday, 8th
March 1982, appeared in that advertisement. In response, Mr and Mrs Leech's niece, Mrs Jean Foy, contacted the Inquiry.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Foy and from Mr Leech's great-nieces, Miss Veronica Jean Foy, Miss Valerie Jeanette Foy and Mrs Denise Huyton. The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1982 and to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Leech lived with his wife in their ground floor flat. He had walked with a limp since injuring one of his legs when he was in his twenties. By 1982, he used a stick for walking. In all other respects, he appeared to have a robust constitution. To his niece's knowledge, he had never had any heart trouble, nor had he had a stroke. However, it would appear that Mr and Mrs Leech were becoming quite frail, as Mrs Foy used to visit them every day to do their cleaning and shopping and to help her uncle to take a bath. She would call every morning and afternoon. She would cook their evening meal and one of her daughters would take it to them on her moped. It appears that they received a good deal of support.
Mrs Foy was unaware of any particular problems in the period before her uncle's death. However, it seems likely that either Mr Leech, or possibly his wife, had some sort of health problem, as the name
'Leech'
appears in Shipman's visits book on 1st
and 15th
February 1982, suggesting that Shipman visited one of them on those days.
The Day of the Death
On 18th
February 1982, after seeing her daughters off to school, Mrs Foy went to her uncle's flat, as was her usual habit. She arrived at about 9.15am and found her uncle seated in his armchair in the lounge. He looked ashen and did not seem at all well. Although he kept looking at Mrs Foy, he did not speak. He was holding his walking stick and kept pointing it in the direction of his bedroom. Initially, Mrs Foy thought that her uncle was trying to tell her that her aunt was ill. Mrs Foy went into the bedroom and found her aunt, still in bed but in normal health. Mrs Foy then returned to the lounge and, after taking 'a good look' at her uncle, telephoned for Shipman. She is sure that her uncle was still alive when she telephoned for Shipman.
Shipman arrived between 10 and 15 minutes later. Mrs Foy let him into the house and followed him into the lounge. He stood in front of Mr Leech and immediately said that he had died. Mrs Foy says that she did not see him touch her uncle and he certainly did not give him an injection. Almost immediately, Shipman went into the bedroom and broke the news to Mrs Leech. Shipman said to Mrs Foy that he would try to get Mrs Leech into The Sycamores, a residential home in Hyde. The name of Leech appears in Shipman's visits book for 18th
February with the letters
'S/S'
alongside. This would suggest an intention to contact the Social Services department of the local authority.
Certification
The counterfoil to the MCCD, completed by Shipman, records that he last saw Mr Leech alive on 15th
February 1982. The cause of death was said to be senility. Shipman said that he had seen the body after death. He said that there would not be a post-mortem examination.
The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') confirms that Mrs Jean Foy was present at the death.
Mr Leech was buried so there are no cremation documents.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mr Leech died of natural causes, although I doubt that the cause of his death could properly be described as senility. Shipman was often careless in the way in which he completed official forms in connection with death registration.
It appears that Mr Leech suffered a sudden medical episode on the morning of 18th
February. Mrs Foy says that he was definitely alive when she telephoned for Shipman, but it appears that he had died by the time Shipman arrived. It rather sounds as though he had a sudden fatal heart attack, or possibly a massive haemorrhagic stroke.
It is clear from Mrs Foy's evidence that Shipman did not do anything to Mr Leech which might have caused his death. There is no reason to suspect that Shipman was unlawfully involved in Mr Leech's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001