The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Winifred Mellor
Introduction
Mrs Winifred Mellor died on 11th
May 1998 at the age of 73. She had lived alone since the death of her husband in 1989. She had been a patient of Shipman since 1977 and held him in very high regard.
Following exhumation of her body in September 1998, scientific analysis showed that she had morphine in the body tissues consistent with the administration of a fatal dose.
Personal Background
Mrs Mellor had been in good health until her death and, although she was a smoker, she did not smoke heavily. She lived a busy life and was described as being young for her age. She still played football with her grandchildren. She was active in her church and in the community. She had recently booked a holiday in the Holy Land. She frequently walked into Hyde to shop, which took ten to fifteen minutes. She developed a cold a few days before her death but did not appear to her daughter, Miss Sheila Mellor, to be seriously ill on the day before she died, when the two had lunch together.
The Circumstances of the Death
On the morning of her death, Mrs Mellor telephoned the school, where she helped the children with reading, to say that she would not come in that day as she had a cold and a bad chest. She said she was going to see the doctor. She cannot have been very ill, as she did not mention any illness to her friends, Mrs Josephine Barnes and Mrs Mary Ball, both of whom spoke to her on the telephone that morning. Also, she went shopping to Hyde Market in the early afternoon. Her friend, Mrs Margaret Nickson, chatted to her and thought she seemed her usual cheerful self. It is not clear whether she contacted Shipman that day and, if so, how. The records show that she did not telephone the surgery, nor did she attend for an appointment. After her death, Shipman told members of the family that he had called on her during the afternoon at her request and indeed Mrs Gloria Ellis, a neighbour, saw his maroon car outside her house from about 3pm until about 3.20pm. At the trial, Shipman denied that he had visited Mrs Mellor that day, until summoned after her death. It must be assumed that the jury was sure that he had visited her during the day while she was still alive.
At about 6.30pm, Shipman called at the house of Mr and Mrs Ellis and asked them to let him into Mrs Mellor's house. He said he could see that Mrs Mellor was not well. When Mr and Mrs Ellis let Shipman into the house, they found Mrs Mellor sitting in her usual chair. Her head was to one side and she looked as though she had fallen asleep. Shipman picked up her hand, then flicked up her eyes and announced that she was dead. Mrs Ellis was very distressed and Shipman was extremely brusque with her.
Shipman's first detailed account of events was given to Mrs Mellor's daughter, Mrs Kathleen Adamski, in a telephone call from Mrs Mellor's home soon after the body was found. He told her that Mrs Mellor had had heart problems since 1997 but that she had refused treatment. He said that she had called at the surgery earlier in the day and he arranged to visit her at 3pm. When he arrived, he had found her quite poorly, complaining of heart or chest problems. She had refused treatment. He did not say why he had left her. He said she had telephoned the surgery at about 5.30pm and he had gone to her flat again as soon as he could. He had seen her through the window but could not gain access so he had gone to a neighbour for a key. Mrs Adamski, who at this stage had not realised that her mother was dead, asked whether he was going to send Mrs Mellor to hospital but he said it was too late. She then realised that her mother was dead.
Shipman repeated this account later that evening in the presence of all three of Mrs Mellor's daughters and the priest, Father Dennis Maher, who had called to give the last rites. Shipman said that Mrs Mellor had telephoned him at the surgery at about 2.30pm complaining of chest pains. He said he had visited at about 3pm and had offered Mrs Mellor a spray to put under her tongue. He also offered to admit her to hospital but she had refused and tried to pass the pain off as indigestion. He then said that she had been suffering from angina since about August 1997. On several occasions, she had refused treatment and did not want to go to hospital. He said that Mrs Mellor had telephoned the surgery again at about 5.30pm to say that her pain was increasing. Shipman had promised to come up as soon as he could. When he arrived, he could see through the window that Mrs Mellor was sitting in her chair. When he knocked, she did not respond. He went to find a neighbour who could let him in. When he had examined her, he found that Mrs Mellor was dead. He said that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis and asked the daughters if they agreed that he should put that on the death certificate. He said nothing about a post-mortem examination.
The daughters found the account very strange. First, they were unaware that their mother had angina and found it hard to believe that she had not told them about it. They were a close family. They also found it hard to believe that their mother would have refused medical treatment. She had a very high opinion of Shipman. Finally, they thought she would have telephoned one of them had she felt ill during the day. There was every sign that Mrs Mellor had been quite well during the day. She was sitting in her usual chair, with a cup of coffee at her side. Her shopping remained unpacked in the kitchen. It may be that her sleeve was rolled up and her arm bruised. That is what the family now recalls, but it should be noted that not all these matters were mentioned to the police when they first took statements.
The three daughters and Mr and Mrs Ellis, the neighbours who gave Shipman access to the house after the death, were shocked at his abrupt and unsympathetic attitude.
Certification
Shipman signed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), giving coronary thrombosis as the cause. He stated that he had last seen Mrs Mellor alive on the day of her death.
The Defence Case
Shipman's account at trial, which the jury must have rejected, was that Mrs Mellor had called into the surgery without appointment at about 4pm on the day of her death. She had given him an account of having suffered chest pain over a period of several months. He advised her that she should have an electrocardiogram and see a cardiologist but she was reluctant and went away, saying that she would think about it. She was to ring him at 5.30pm. As she failed to do so, he went to see her on his way home and found her dead. He claimed to have carried out a full examination to establish death. He accepted the evidence that morphine had been found in the body tissues and could offer no explanation as to how it came to be there.
The Medical Records
By the time of trial, it had been established that Mrs Mellor's records had been altered at about 4pm on the day of the death. New, backdated entries had been created to give the impression that Mrs Mellor had been suffering from chest pain over a period of several months and had refused the treatment suggested by the doctor. At trial, Shipman claimed that he had made those backdated entries to reflect what Mrs Mellor had told him when she called into the surgery on 11th
May. He said they were not intended to mislead (although they clearly did). The entries contained information which could not have been recalled so long after the date of the supposed consultation and could not have been honestly made so as to reflect information provided on the day of the death. Moreover, in interview, before it had been established that the records had been backdated, Shipman claimed that the entries were contemporaneous records of Mrs Mellor's complaints of chest pain.
The medical records also contained two entries made early in the morning of the day after the death, both of which related to the day of the death. The first described an attack of angina pectoris with no signs of congestive heart failure. It was said that Mrs Mellor had refused treatment. There is no reference to a refusal to go to hospital. The second entry deals with Shipman's visit at which he declared that Mrs Mellor was dead. The cause of death was given as coronary thrombosis. The record noted that her daughter and a neighbour were present. Although the record does not explicitly say so, it gives the misleading impression that the daughter and neighbour were present at the time of death.
If the falsified records are taken out of account, there is nothing in Mrs Mellor's medical history to suggest that she was suffering from any serious or potentially fatal condition.
The Post-Mortem Examination
Post-mortem examination revealed no natural cause of death. There was no significant abnormality of the heart or blood vessels. There was no intracranial bleeding and no blood clots were seen in the lung. There was some narrowing of the arteries but not such as would account for sudden death, save under physical stress.
Comment
This was a clear case of morphine poisoning as the post-mortem results showed. Apart from that evidence, the case contains a number of features worthy of note:
This was a sudden death of a woman who lived alone and which was discovered shortly after a visit from Shipman, at a time when she was alone. No one saw Mrs Mellor alive or spoke to her after Shipman had visited.
Shipman altered medical records to create a history of angina, which was supportive of his diagnosis of the cause of death, namely coronary thrombosis.
There are important conflicts between the accounts Shipman gave at the time of the death and the evidence given at trial. Shipman told the family that he had visited Mrs Mellor at home at about 3pm. He told them that Mrs Mellor had been suffering from angina for about a year. At the trial, he said that Mrs Mellor saw him at the surgery in the afternoon and told him for the first time about the angina symptoms she had supposedly been suffering. This was a complete volte-face, rendered necessary by the realisation that the police had been able to trace and time the false records.
Shipman claimed that the patient had refused treatment shortly before death. This is one of his regular excuses for leaving a supposedly sick patient alone when the truth was that the patient had not been ill and had not required treatment but had been killed by Shipman. He would then have an explanation for the death when it was discovered.
Shipman was ready to give the impression that a daughter and neighbour had been present at the time of death, when they had not.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001