The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Nellie Mullen
Introduction
Mrs Nellie Mullen died at her home, 11 Lanegate, Hyde, a warden-controlled bungalow, on Sunday, 2nd
May 1993 at the age of 77. She had been a widow since 1968, and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman for many years and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of Mrs Mullen's death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
Mrs Mullen's death came to the attention of the police in February 1999, when her name was seen in the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy drugs register, which showed she had been prescribed diamorphine. Following the commencement of Shipman's trial, Mrs Mullen's daughter Mrs Angela Pugh, who lives in Australia, contacted the police to express concern about her mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Patricia Anne Rooke (Mrs Mullen's niece), Mr Geoffrey Lawton (her nephew), Mrs Thelma Lawton (Mr Lawton's wife), Mrs Kathryn McGraw (her great-niece), Mrs Hilda Redfern (her next door neighbour), Mr Peter Stewart Brannigan (Mrs Redfern's grandson), Mr Michael John Buckley (mobile warden with Tameside MBC), Ms Carol Hillson (senior mobile warden with Tameside MBC) and Ms Ghislaine Brant (pharmacist at the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Mullen, but an inquest was held on 23rd
January 2001, at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Pugh, Mrs Rooke, Mr Lawton and Mrs McGraw. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Mullen's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
For some years before her death, Mrs Mullen had occasionally suffered from 'palpitations'. These had become more frequent in 1986 when she had a possible left-sided stroke. For the last year or two, she had had dizzy spells but these were thought not to be of cardiac origin. She was also thought to have periodic cardiac arrhythmia for which she took medication. Dr Grenville, who examined the medical records in this case, provided a full report and gave evidence at the inquest into Mrs Mullen's death, said that arrhythmia is often due to underlying ischaemic heart disease but that that is not always the case. It seems probable, however, that Mrs Mullen had some underlying ischaemic heart disease and was at some increased risk of a sudden cardiac death.
Notwithstanding her health problems, Mrs Mullen lived a very active life. She would often walk into Hyde town centre and back to her house. On fine days it would be rare to find her at home. She was mentally very alert and had a good memory, both long and short term. She was petite and always smartly dressed. She knew many people in Hyde and had many friends.
Mrs Rooke kept a shop in Hyde. One day, during the week before her death, Mrs Mullen walked into Hyde and visited Mrs Rooke at her shop. However, she was not feeling well and Mrs Rooke sent her home in a taxi. Mrs Rooke was not at all worried about her aunt; otherwise she would have taken her home. That was the last time she saw her aunt. There was a similar episode a couple of days later when Mrs Mullen took ill and had to be driven home.
On the Friday before she died, 30th
April, Mrs Mullen called upon her neighbour, Mrs Redfern. They chatted for about three-quarters of an hour during which time Mrs Mullen seemed well and did not complain of any illness.
The Day of the Death
On Sunday, 2nd
May 1993, some time after 10am, Ms Hillson received a call to go to Mrs Mullen's address. On arrival, Mrs Mullen told her that she was feeling unwell and had chest pain. However, she did not seem concerned about herself and showed no outward sign of distress. Mrs Mullen was moving about her flat and looked quite well. Ms Hillson, who as a senior warden had some experience of assessing the needs of her elderly clients, was not worried about her. In particular, Ms Hillson well knew the typical signs of a heart attack and recalls that Mrs Mullen displayed none of these. Had she been concerned, she would have called an ambulance. She stayed and chatted for about 15 minutes and it was decided that Ms Hillson would call the doctor. That done, Ms Hillson left Mrs Mullen, intending to revisit, or to ask a colleague to visit, later that day.
Some time later, between noon and 12.30pm, Shipman knocked on Mrs Redfern's door. He introduced himself and said that Mrs Mullen was ill with heart trouble and that she had had a bad heart for some time. He asked Mrs Redfern whether she knew that and Mrs Redfern said that Mrs Mullen had mentioned it in the past. Shipman then said that he had been with Mrs Mullen for a while that morning and had given her some medication. He now had to leave for half an hour but would come back. He said that the warden had been to see Mrs Mullen earlier, that she might return and might knock on Mrs Redfern's door. If Mrs Redfern were to see the warden, would she say that Shipman would not be long? Mrs Redfern agreed to do this and Shipman left. However, Mrs Redfern saw from her window that instead of leaving, Shipman went back into Mrs Mullen's house. Fifteen minutes later, he had still not left.
Some time that morning, another warden, Mr Buckley, had received a call to go to Mrs Mullen's address. When he arrived, he found the front door ajar. He knocked. Shipman came out and introduced himself as Mrs Mullen's general practitioner. Shipman told Mr Buckley that he had been asked to visit Mrs Mullen. When he had arrived, he found the front door open, so he knocked and went in. On going into the lounge, he had found Mrs Mullen dead. Mr Buckley looked at Mrs Mullen. She was fully dressed in day clothes, sitting in an armchair and appeared to be asleep. She looked very relaxed and peaceful and had a good colour to her face. Even though Shipman had told Mr Buckley that Mrs Mullen was dead, it was Mr Buckley's instinctive reaction to go over to Mrs Mullen and check her wrist for a pulse. When he touched Mrs Mullen, he noticed that she was still warm. Shipman told Mr Buckley that Mrs Mullen had been ailing for some time and it would not be a problem for him to issue a death certificate. He asked if Mr Buckley knew the next of kin. Mr Buckley asked his control room to find the next of kin but they were unable to do so. Shipman said that he had to go to the surgery and had to see another patient but would return and would help Mr Buckley to go through Mrs Mullen's address book to find her next of kin. Mr Buckley stayed at the house. In due course, Shipman returned and they made telephone calls until they located the Lawton household.
It was not until late afternoon that Mrs Mullen's relatives were contacted and asked to go to Mrs Mullen's home. Mr Lawton and Mrs Rooke attended. Shipman was there. Mrs Rooke noticed how peaceful her aunt looked and also saw that her aunt was smartly dressed and wearing outdoor shoes, rather than the slippers she usually wore about the house. Mrs Rooke recalls that Shipman told her that he had received a call from the warden to say that Mrs Mullen was poorly. He had come to the house and had found Mrs Mullen to be very ill. He had called an ambulance. Whilst he was waiting, he had gone to the door to see if the ambulance was coming and, when he returned to Mrs Mullen, she was dead. In other words, he gave a different account of events to the family from that given to Mr Buckley. Due to the passage of time, it has not been possible for the police to check whether Shipman ever had called an ambulance. Later in the afternoon, Mrs Redfern's grandson noticed a vehicle outside the house, which resembled an ambulance, but it appears likely that this was the vehicle in which the undertaker removed Mrs Mullen's body.
Certification
Shipman subsequently issued the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). He stated that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. He said that the approximate interval between the onset of coronary thrombosis and death was:
'? 2 hours.'
. He said that Mrs Mullen had been suffering from ischaemic heart disease for three years.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation forms. He stated that death had occurred at
'14.30 hrs 2/5/93'
. He said he had attended the deceased during her last illness for a period of
'30-40 mnts'
. He also said he had last seen Mrs Mullen alive
'30-40 mnts'
before her death. He gave the cause of death as myocardial infarction due to ischaemic heart disease and said that the mode of death was collapse of only minutes' duration. He said that his information about the cause and mode of death was based on his own observations and the statement of a neighbour, whose name was not given. However, if he was referring to Mrs Redfern, she could have had nothing to tell him about the cause or mode of death. In Form B, Shipman also said that he and a mobile warden were present at the moment of death. He said he saw the body immediately after death and made a complete external examination of it. The effect of these entries is to create the impression that two other people were involved in and knew about the process of dying, whereas the evidence of those others leads to the conclusion that Shipman was alone with Mrs Mullen.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville considered the entry in the medical records made by Shipman for the day of the death. This, as interpreted by Dr Grenville, records that Shipman visited at 2pm at the request of the warden. He found that Mrs Mullen had been suffering from chest pain all day and this was radiating into her left arm and neck. She was sweaty and grey. Her blood pressure was low and her pulse was faint. Shipman made a diagnosis of coronary thrombosis. There is a handwritten note which then reads:
'TGH
Amb
warden
'
. The note implies that Shipman arranged admission to Tameside General Hospital, arranged an ambulance to transport Mrs Mullen there and informed the warden. There is then an arrow under
'TGH'
and
'Amb'
followed by the word 'cancelled'. This is followed by a cross and the time 14.30 hours (
2.30pm
). This implies that Mrs Mullen died at 2.30pm. Shipman's note then reads:
'Relatives
'
. This implies that the relatives were then informed. There is then a note that states:
'1 CT 2 IHD'
. This implies that Shipman certified the cause of death as coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. According to the note, no treatment was given, although Shipman told Mrs Redfern he had given Mrs Mullen some medication. Dr Grenville says that, if a patient is suffering from cardiac pain, it is appropriate to give a small dose of diamorphine of, say, 5mg, to ease pain and help breathing.
Miscellaneous
As a postscript to the evidence in this case, investigations have shown that a prescription signed by Shipman and supposedly for the benefit of Mrs Mullen was presented at the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy, Market Street, Hyde on 5th
May, three days after Mrs Mullen's death. Such presentation was a breach of the provisions of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971.
Conclusion
Mrs Mullen's underlying medical condition put her at some increased risk of suffering a sudden cardiac death. It is therefore possible that she suffered a heart attack on 2nd
May, as Shipman claims she did in the note he made in the medical record. That is so, even though she was not displaying any signs of heart attack when visited by Ms Hillson. It is possible that the chest pain of the early morning was the effect of an attack of angina, which might have progressed to a myocardial infarction. However, the chances of her suffering a fatal occlusion during the short period of Shipman's visit are very low.
If Shipman really did find Mrs Mullen suffering a heart attack, he should have arranged admission to hospital and called an ambulance. He noted that he had done so and it has not been possible to find out whether or not he did. It does appear that, as he noted, Shipman called the warden. He should also have given Mrs Mullen some treatment for her pain, which, when speaking to Mrs Redfern, he claimed he had given. That treatment should have been a small dose of diamorphine, if available. He should also have given an aspirin to thin the blood. If, as is implied by the record, Mrs Mullen went into a state of cardiac arrest, Shipman should have attempted resuscitation. That he did not is obvious, as he could not have done anything useful while she was sitting in a chair. The fact that he cancelled the ambulance, which was, according to him, then on its way, rather than allow the paramedics to assist with resuscitation, gives rise to real suspicion. In other respects, the medical record for the day of the death is a feasible account of a cardiac death, but given Shipman's known record for creating false records, no reliance can be placed upon it.
In many other respects, this death appears highly suspicious. First, the death took place while Shipman was alone with the patient. A sudden death in the presence of a general practitioner is a rare event in the lives of most doctors but it happened frequently with Shipman. This factor is, of itself, enough to make me think that the death was probably unlawful. Second, Mrs Mullen's appearance in death, sitting peacefully in her chair, was not typical of a cardiac death but was entirely typical of a death by diamorphine injection. Third, if the evidence of the witnesses is accurate, Shipman gave a different account of the death to Mr Buckley from the one he later gave to the family. His completion of Form B of the cremation certificate is entirely typical of cases in which he has killed the patient and seeks, by his completion of this form, to draw other people into involvement and to make it appear he was not alone with the patient at the time of death.
I have come to the conclusion that Shipman must have killed Mrs Mullen. In my view, the chance that she suffered a fatal heart attack just as he arrived at the house is very unlikely. I think that, when Shipman arrived, Mrs Mullen probably did complain of chest pain. That is not to say she was having a heart attack, although she might have been. The chest pain of which she had been complaining earlier could have had many different causes. I think Shipman gave an injection of diamorphine, which he knew would kill her. He then telephoned for the warden and went next door to speak to Mrs Redfern. When Mr Buckley arrived, Mrs Mullen was recently dead and her body was still warm. Later, Shipman gave the relatives a different account of events from that which he had given to Mr Buckley. That account was, in itself, not implausible and tallied with the account which he wrote in the medical records. The lies he told in Form B were designed to make it appear that others had been involved with Mrs Mullen before and at the time of death. I am sure that Mrs Mullen was killed by Shipman.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001