The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Bertha Moss
Introduction
Mrs Bertha Moss (also known as Betty) died at Shipman's surgery, 21 Market Street, Hyde on Tuesday, 13th
June 1995 at the age of 68. She was a widow and lived alone in sheltered accommodation at 7 Newton Hall Court, Hyde. She had been a patient of Shipman since the late 1970s and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought very highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to congestive heart failure and hypertension.
In August 1998, Mrs Moss' daughter, Mrs Helen Blackwell, contacted the police to express concern about her mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Joan Clayton, Mrs Betty Clayton, Mrs Anne Whelan, Mrs Brenda Hurst and Mrs Jayne Rhoda Gaskell (five of Mrs Moss' six daughters), Mr Andrew Michael Walton (Mrs Moss' nephew), Mrs Susan Tracy Walton (Mr Walton's wife), Mr Brian Thomas Gaskell (Mrs Gaskell's husband) Mr Alan Garforth and Mrs Jessie Morley (Mrs Moss' friends), Ms Jayne Kenyon (a receptionist at the Market Street Surgery) and Mrs Deborah Jayne Bambroffe (a funeral director at Frank Massey and Son, funeral directors). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville and Dr Peter Bennett.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Moss but an inquest was held on 8th
February 2001 at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing. The Coroner's certificate wrongly states that the inquest was held on 9th
February 2001.
The Inquiry has taken additional statements from Mrs Whelan, Mrs Hurst and Mrs Gaskell and has obtained statements from Mrs Blackwell. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Moss' general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
In addition to her six daughters Mrs Moss also had a son, Mr John Walton, who lives in Australia. She saw her children quite frequently, apart from Mrs Joan Clayton, who also lives in Australia and with whom Mrs Moss was in close telephone contact. Mrs Moss was a cheerful woman who led an active life. She did her own shopping and housework. She enjoyed shopping trips on which her daughter, Mrs Blackwell, took her quite far afield. She loved ballroom dancing. She visited her daughter in Australia several times. So far as the family was aware, Mrs Moss was in quite good health, although she complained from time to time about various minor ailments. Her daughters were aware that she had high blood pressure and diabetes. They also knew that she had problems with her legs. She had suffered a deep venous thrombosis in the past.
Dr Grenville has reviewed the medical notes and records. They show that Mrs Moss was overweight. She had been a cigarette smoker for many years. She had mature onset diabetes. The records confirm a history of hypertension controlled by medication and also peripheral vascular disease. In June 1993, Shipman had recorded that Mrs Moss had congestive heart failure. He prescribed medication for this until her death two years later. However, a chest x-ray taken in 1993 showed that the heart was not enlarged. Dr Grenville said that all these factors considered together put Mrs Moss at a high risk of suffering a heart attack.
Mrs Moss liked Shipman and she liked going to see him. According to her friend, Mr Garforth, Shipman had once told her that she was his most expensive patient. She replied that 'she was worth it, wasn't she?'
The Events of the Weeks Leading up to Death
On 5th
June 1995, Mrs Moss and Mr Garforth went to Eastbourne for a short holiday. While she was away, her legs troubled her and Mr Garforth advised her to see a doctor. Mrs Moss said that she already had an appointment booked for the following Tuesday.
Mrs Gaskell last saw her mother alive on the day before she died, 12th
June. Mrs Gaskell called in on her way home from work. Mrs Moss was in good spirits. Mrs Gaskell was aware that her mother was going to see Shipman on the following day for a check-up. She was not aware of any specific physical problems at that time.
The Day of the Death
At about 1pm on 13th
June 1995, Mrs Betty Clayton saw her mother near Hyde market. Mrs Moss had been shopping. The two had a chat and Mrs Moss said that she was going to the doctor's later on. The appointments sheet shows that she was due to be seen at 4.30pm. She arrived at about 4pm and met her old friend, Mrs Morley, in the waiting area. The two chatted until Mrs Morley was called in. Mrs Moss had not mentioned any particular symptom or condition to her and Mrs Morley recalls that she seemed quite cheerful. Mrs Morley was with Shipman for about 5 to 10 minutes. As she left, she noted that Mrs Moss was the only patient then waiting. Mrs Morley said goodbye and Mrs Moss replied, 'Tarrah Jess see you again'. Mrs Moss still appeared well to Mrs Morley. When Mrs Morley was told the next day that Mrs Moss had died in the surgery, she was shocked. To her it was unbelievable that Mrs Moss could have died so suddenly.
Ms Kenyon was the receptionist on duty that afternoon. She recalls that, some time after Mrs Moss had gone into the consulting room, Shipman came to the reception desk and asked for the telephone number of Mrs Moss' next of kin. She thinks that he must also have said that she had died. He then telephoned Mrs Hurst. He told her that Mrs Moss was with him at the surgery and that she had suffered a heart attack. Mrs Hurst asked Shipman whether he was sending Mrs Moss to Tameside General Hospital. Shipman said he was not and asked Mrs Hurst to come to the surgery. At that stage, Mrs Hurst did not realise that her mother had died. She telephoned her sisters, Mrs Betty Clayton and Mrs Gaskell, to ask them to go to Shipman's surgery, as they lived closer than she did and would arrive sooner than she could.
Mrs Gaskell arrived at the surgery no more than 10 to 15 minutes later. Shipman took her into his office. As she sat down, Shipman told her that Mrs Moss had come into his surgery feeling unwell. Shipman then said, 'and there was nothing I could do'. Shipman did not actually say that Mrs Moss had died but Mrs Gaskell eventually realised what had happened. Shipman asked Mrs Gaskell whether she wanted to see her mother. She said that she did not. At that point, Mrs Betty Clayton arrived and Mrs Gaskell broke the news to her sister, who was extremely shocked. Shipman then took Mrs Clayton into his examination room, where she saw her mother, lying on her back on the treatment bed. She was wearing her bra and her trousers. She had a plastic tube in her mouth. Her skin looked purple, with patchy discolouring. Her shopping bag was by the side of the bed. Mrs Clayton put her hand on her mother's arm and kissed her cheek. Her mother felt cold.
Whilst they were in the examination room, Shipman said that Mrs Moss had had a heart attack and that he had done what he could, but to no avail. Shipman said that he had taken an electrocardiograph (ECG) and that, whilst he was putting the equipment away, Mrs Moss had had a 'funny do'. He said that he had tried his best to revive her but was unable to do so. He told the family that Mrs Moss had been in 'slow heart failure' for years. He said that the ECG trace showed that Mrs Moss had had a slight heart attack. He said that it would not be necessary to have a post-mortem examination, as he had been present at the death. He suggested that the family would not want to have her body 'cut up'. He explained that he could issue the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), which he began to write whilst he was still speaking to the family. He asked whether the family wanted him to arrange an undertaker or whether they had a preference. The family agreed that Shipman should organise the removal of their mother's body. It is now known that there was no ECG trace in Mrs Moss' records. Ms Kenyon, the receptionist, says that she was not asked to call an ambulance.
Mrs Whelan also spoke to Shipman and asked why her mother had died. Shipman said that if Mrs Moss's heart had not killed her, it would have been her legs and she would have had to have them 'chopped off' because of her diabetes. Shipman said that she would not have wanted to spend the rest of her life in a wheelchair and to be a burden to her family.
The medical records for the day of the death are very brief. The manuscript record says:
'13/6/95 a.
Usual CHF check
c/o vague chest pain
(L) arm
ECG - C.T.
Collapsed no output
no BP no respiration
A/W
bag
ECM
15 minutes no response -
17.00
CT.
CHF
IHD
Diabetes Mellitus'
.
I interpret this to mean that Mrs Moss came in to the surgery for a routine check of her congestive heart failure. She complained of a vague pain in her chest radiating into the left arm. Shipman put her on the ECG machine and the printout showed that she had had a coronary thrombosis. She then collapsed and there was no sign of life. He used an airway and a bag and carried out external cardiac massage for 15 minutes without success. He certified her dead at 5pm. The causes of death were coronary thrombosis, congestive heart failure, ischaemic heart disease and diabetes mellitus.
The computerised records contain the following separate entries for 13th
June 1995:
'Seen in GP's surgery
Congestive heart failure
100/80 90k oedema
Atopic dermatitis/eczema
Cutivate
Chest pain
central to l arm
O/E dead'
.
Taken together these appear to say that Mrs Moss had congestive heart failure, that her blood pressure was 100/80 and that her weight was 90 kilograms. She complained of atopic dermatitis or eczema, for which she was to be treated with Cutivate. She then went on to complain of chest pain radiating to the left arm and was dead on examination. These records are wholly inadequate and give no proper description of what happened.
The Aftermath
Mrs Joan Clayton returned to England on hearing of her mother's death and spoke to Shipman on 17th
June. Shipman told her that her mother had come in to the surgery for a check-up. He had asked her how she was in general. She replied that she had a slight pain in one of her shoulders. He had looked at her shoulder but could not find anything wrong. He decided to give her an ECG scan. This showed that she had had a slight heart attack some time earlier. Shipman said that she was not in any pain at that time. Shipman then said that he had told Mrs Moss that she would have to go into hospital for tests. Mrs Moss asked him to contact one of her daughters to collect her nightwear. As he was returning the leads to the ECG machine, he turned away from Mrs Moss. Whilst his back was turned, Mrs Moss had suffered a massive heart attack. Shipman said that he and the surgery staff had tried for 20 minutes to revive her but he 'couldn't keep her back' and that she had died. Mrs Joan Clayton expressed surprise at the death because the family was unaware that Mrs Moss had any heart condition. Shipman stated that Mrs Moss was a borderline diabetic and this could mask other illness.
The only member of staff working in the surgery at the relevant time was the receptionist, Ms Kenyon. Ms Kenyon says that she was not asked to help with resuscitation. Nor has she any recollection of seeing an ECG printout for Mrs Moss.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD, giving the cause as coronary thrombosis due to congestive heart failure and hypertension. Diabetes mellitus had contributed to the death but was not related to the condition that had caused it. He stated that the interval between the onset of the coronary thrombosis and death was a period of
'seconds'
.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that death had occurred at the surgery at
'17.00'
on 13th
June 1995. He said that he had attended Mrs Moss for a period of ten minutes during her last illness. He saw her immediately before and after death and made a complete external examination. He gave the cause of death as on the MCCD. The mode of death was collapse of seconds' duration only. Shipman said that his answers to the questions relating to the cause and mode of death were his based on his own observations and added:
'Had coronary just before entering
the surgery - ECG confirmed
patient collapsed non-resuscitatable'
.
Shipman stated that both he and practice staff were present at the moment of death. This is inconsistent with Ms Kenyon's evidence.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville made two statements for the police. Initially, he said that the account Shipman had recorded was plausible, although he thought it surprising that Shipman had not called for an ambulance and appeared to have attempted resuscitation alone. However, he did not know about Mrs Morley's evidence. When he learned that Mrs Moss had been chatting to Mrs Morley and had appeared to be in normal health just before going into the surgery, he provided another opinion. He then said:
'If Mrs Moss had chest pain of a degree and nature which caused Dr Shipman to become immediately suspicious that she had suffered a coronary thrombosis, to the extent that he immediately performed an electrocardiograph, she would have felt unwell and would have been distressed and this would have been readily noticeable to Mrs Morley. In my view it is not possible for Mrs Moss to have developed a pain after seeing Mrs Morley but before seeing Dr Shipman. It is clear from the evidence that Mrs Moss must have seen Dr Shipman within a few minutes of having said goodbye to Mrs Morley. Dr Shipman has noted that the electrocardiograph (ECG) showed a coronary thrombosis. The ECG changes diagnostic of coronary thrombosis take time to appear after the onset of the coronary thrombosis. The time taken is of the order of a half to one hour but may be longer. The pain of a coronary thrombosis, however, develops within a minute or two after the event. I therefore conclude that if the ECG showed signs of a coronary thrombosis this must have been present for at least half an hour and probably longer and Mrs Moss would have had her pain for at least this amount of time. This means that she would have had the pain during the time that she was speaking to Mrs Morley and it would have been apparent to Mrs Morley'.
Dr Grenville concludes that Shipman's records are inconsistent with the evidence, in particular, the evidence of Mrs Morley. In the absence of the ECG tracing, Dr Grenville doubts the accuracy of the records and considers that there is nothing to justify the stated cause of death as coronary thrombosis.
Professor Richard Baker found the death highly suspicious on account of the contents both of the cremation forms and the medical records.
Conclusion
Mrs Moss was at a high risk of suffering a heart attack. However, she was well while sitting in the waiting area of the surgery a few minutes before seeing Shipman. Although it is theoretically possible that she could have begun to suffer the pain of a heart attack as she entered the surgery, this would be something of a coincidence. If she had, and if she told Shipman about it, he might have taken an ECG. However, as Dr Grenville has explained, the trace would not have confirmed a heart attack which had occurred as recently as this one supposedly had. I suspect that Shipman's account was not true. The ECG trace has never been found. I suspect that it was never taken. I also find it odd that a woman who is supposed to be suffering a coronary thrombosis should be sufficiently unconcerned about the chest pain to mention her skin condition.
Shipman's conduct after Mrs Moss had her supposed heart attack was so inappropriate as to excite further suspicion that Shipman's account was fabricated. If a patient has a heart attack and collapses, any doctor would call an ambulance and would bring in help when trying to resuscitate. Single-handed resuscitation is much less likely to succeed. The process requires cardiac massage and assisted respiration using a bag and mask, which were available at the surgery. Also adrenaline should be given. Shipman probably did not call an ambulance and did not seek the help of the receptionist, although he told Mrs Joan Clayton that he had done. He also lied in Form B so as to make it appear that he was not the only person present at the death.
Taking these factors into account, I am driven to the conclusion that Shipman must have killed Mrs Moss. Like the coroner, I am sure that this was an unlawful killing.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001