The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Joan May Melia
Introduction
Mrs Joan May Melia died on 12th
June 1998 at the age of 73. Shipman certified her death as being due to lobar pneumonia. Post-mortem examination after exhumation of her body showed a level of morphine in the tissues consistent with the administration of a lethal dose.
The Circumstances of the Death
Mrs Melia was in good general health in the months before her death. She attended Shipman's surgery infrequently. On 11th
June 1998, she was feeling tired and under the weather. The following morning, her companion, Mr Derek Steele, took her to Shipman's surgery. Shipman prescribed an antibiotic. Mrs Melia collected her prescription and bought some throat pastilles. She told Mr Steele that the doctor had said that she had pleurisy and pneumonia. In fact, in her medical records, he had noted only that she had a chest infection, the nature of which was not otherwise specified, that air entry was reduced and he could hear rhonchi in the chest. Mr Steele was surprised at the reference to pleurisy and pneumonia, as Mrs Melia did not seem to be seriously ill. He thought that, if she were suffering from these conditions, she would have been admitted to hospital. He took her home. She seemed tired, so he suggested that she should have a rest. He left her and went to his own home nearby. In the late afternoon, he telephoned her but there was no reply. He went round and found Mrs Melia sitting in a chair with her glasses on and a crossword puzzle on her knee. She was dead and her body already felt cold. There were signs that she had had something to eat since Mr Steele had left her.
At 5.54pm, Mr Steele sent for Shipman. On arrival, Shipman looked at Mrs Melia and said that the tablets had not had time to work. He did not touch her. He said he would make out a death certificate. He was in the house only five minutes. He completed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), saying that the cause of death was lobar pneumonia of two to three days' duration with emphysema as an unrelated contributory condition.
The following day, Shipman told Mrs Melia's niece that her aunt had been very poorly when he saw her in the surgery the previous morning. He had told her to go home to bed. There was no point in taking her to hospital, as she might have died on the way there. He had done what he thought right at the time. He said nothing about a post-mortem examination.
The Defence Case
Shipman's account in evidence, which the jury must have rejected, was that, on the morning of the day of her death, Mrs Melia had complained of a cough with green sputum and of feeling generally unwell. She had no pleuritic pain. Shipman told her to let him know if she had any pain and promised her that he would visit her the following day. Shipman warned her that, if she were no better, she would have to go to hospital. He advised her to go home, take the antibiotic and plenty of liquid and keep warm. Mr Steele summoned him that evening. Shipman examined Mrs Melia's eyes and pulse but she was clearly dead. She was cold. He thought she had died of lobar pneumonia. He had diagnosed that condition that morning but did not think it appropriate to send her to hospital. If all patients who had that condition were to be admitted, the hospitals would be overrun. Only five per cent of sufferers died of it. It was sensible to send her home. He had not mentioned a post-mortem examination to Mr Steele because he had not realised he was closely connected with Mrs Melia. He had no explanation for the morphine in her body.
The Expert Evidence
Post-mortem examination by Dr John Rutherford, the pathologist, showed slight emphysema and moderate narrowing of the arteries. Mrs Melia had not had lobar pneumonia. He found nothing to account for her death. There were food remains in the stomach, showing that Mrs Melia had eaten a meal not long before death. The scientific analysis of the body tissues showed the presence of morphine and Dr Rutherford said that the cause of death was morphine toxicity. This was not challenged by Shipman. Dr Rutherford made the point that a death from lobar pneumonia can be very rapid but, if this occurs, the patient is extremely ill at the end. He also said that it would appear that Mrs Melia had a chest infection on the day of her death. The administration of morphine while lung function was impaired would have a disastrous effect. In other words, even a dose that was normally safe might be fatal.
Dr John Grenville said that the medical records showed that Mrs Melia had been in good general health. A chest x-ray taken in February 1998 showed only minor changes. The record of the morning visit and the prescription of an antibiotic connoted a chest infection of moderate severity but not one from which the patient might die so quickly. The fact that Mrs Melia had had something to eat after Mr Steele left showed she had not been very ill. This was a sudden death for which the cause was unknown and the coroner should have been informed.
Comment
Had it not been for the finding of morphine in the body tissues, there would have been very little evidence of Shipman's involvement in the death:
First, there is no direct evidence of a visit by Shipman during the afternoon of 12th
June. No one saw Shipman arrive or leave; no one saw his car outside. There is no record of a visit in the surgery documents or on the computer. However, the jury must have been prepared to infer that Shipman had visited Mrs Melia and had administered a fatal dose, almost certainly of diamorphine.
Second, there are no false, exaggerated or backdated entries in the medical records. The record of the consultation of the morning of 12th
June appears to be a genuine one, properly reflecting the moderately severe chest infection from which Mrs Melia was actually suffering. Shipman does not appear to have created any false records to lend credibility to the cause of death he was to certify.
Third, Shipman did not spin any elaborate tale of Mrs Melia having refused treatment or hospital admission.
The only suspicious factors (apart from the finding of morphine) were that Shipman exaggerated the seriousness of her chest infection when speaking to Mrs Melia and certified a cause of death which was incompatible with her ability to walk about and eat a meal only a short time before death. If Mrs Melia had been cremated, there would have been no prospect of Shipman being convicted of her killing.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001