The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Elizabeth Ellen Mellor
Introduction
Mrs Elizabeth Ellen Mellor (known as Lizzie) died at her home, 27 Sidley Place, Hyde on Wednesday, 30th
November 1994 at the age of 75. She had been a widow for five years and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman for several years at the time of her death and was registered at the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to cerebroarteriosclerosis
In November 1998, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's arrest, Mrs Mellor's daughter, Mrs Shirley Barnes, contacted the police on behalf of her family to express concern about her mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Barnes, Mrs Michelle Joanne Redfern and Mrs Joyce Harrison (Mrs Mellor's neighbours), Miss Charlotte Louise Harrison (Mrs Harrison's daughter), Mrs Lyndsay Carol Dransfield (Mrs Harrison's granddaughter), Dr John David Rutherford (a consultant forensic pathologist), Ms Julie Marie Evans (a forensic scientist), Mr Richard Malcolm Aucott (a pharmacist and the owner of Nu-Pharm Chemist, Clarendon Street, Hyde) and Mr Steven Booth (a driver for Nu-Pharm Chemist). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Mrs Mellor was buried. Her body was exhumed and Dr Rutherford carried out a post-mortem examination. Toxicological examination was undertaken by Ms Evans who found morphine in the tissue samples taken from the liver and thigh muscle. She expressed concern about the reliability of the levels found, because of the lapse of time since the death. On the basis of these toxicological findings, Dr Rutherford expressed the view that the balance of medical evidence was strongly supportive of the view that death was caused by morphine toxicity.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Mellor, but an inquest was held on 26th
September 2000, at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Barnes and has had access to Mrs Mellor's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
About a year before her death, Mrs Mellor suffered a stroke. She appeared to have made a good recovery from this and was discharged by her physiotherapist in May 1994. She was able to run her own home and do some of her cooking. Mrs Barnes visited her mother in the evenings and took her something to eat. She recalls that, during the last nine months of her life, Mrs Mellor's health seemed to improve.
The medical and practice records reveal that Shipman visited Mrs Mellor at home regularly, usually once a month. He checked her blood pressure, heart and chest. In the six months before her death, none of these examinations revealed any cause for concern.
On the evening of 29th
November, Mrs Barnes visited her mother as usual and found her in normal health and good spirits.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of 30th
November, Mrs Redfern called to see Mrs Mellor between 11.30am and noon. Mrs Redfern found Mrs Mellor to be her usual self. Mrs Mellor told her that the doctor had been to see her, had examined her and had prescribed some pills. The visits book for the day suggests that this was a routine revisit.
At the time of Mrs Mellor's death, the Nu-Pharm Pharmacy in Hyde provided a home delivery service. It appears that, between 12.30pm and 1pm on 30th
November, Mr Booth delivered a prescription for Mrs Mellor to the home of a neighbour, Mrs Harrison. He told Mrs Harrison that there had been no reply at Mrs Mellor's flat. Mrs Harrison called round at Mrs Mellor's flat on a number of occasions that afternoon but also obtained no reply. Later in the afternoon, probably some time between 4pm and 5pm, Mrs Harrison telephoned Mrs Barnes to express concern that there was no reply at Mrs Mellor's flat. Mrs Barnes went round and found her mother, fully dressed, sitting upright in a chair, with a book on the floor next to her, looking as though she had fallen peacefully asleep while reading. Her hands were facing upwards on her lap, but, when Mrs Barnes touched them, they were cold. Mrs Mellor was dead.
Shipman was called and arrived at about 6.30pm. He did not examine Mrs Mellor. He expressed surprise at finding Mrs Mellor dead and remarked that she had been very well when he had seen her earlier that afternoon. He added that her heart and blood pressure had never been 'so good' since her stroke.
Shipman made a number of entries in Mrs Mellor's medical records for the day of her death. In the handwritten records, he wrote:
'V
(
visit
)
130/90 oedema trace
HS I II
Bloods'
.
This suggests that Shipman examined Mrs Mellor, found her blood pressure to be 130/90, which is satisfactory, saw a trace of oedema or ankle swelling, and heard normal heart sounds. Significantly, he said that he took blood samples.
In the computerised records, Shipman wrote that he had seen Mrs Mellor at home and had examined her. The blood pressure is recorded as 130/70, which is different from the record in the handwritten note. There is no reference to taking blood samples but the entry ends with the words:
'having TCI s seconds only'
.
'TCI' is transient cerebral ischaemia, more usually called a transient ischaemic attack. There is no equivalent entry in the handwritten records.
The handwritten records also contain a brief entry saying that Mrs Mellor had been found dead in her chair and indicating that the death certificate would say that she had died of a cerebrovascular accident due to cerebrovascular arteriosclerosis.
The Aftermath and The Expert Evidence
Shipman signed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) certifying that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident due to cerebroarteriosclerosis. He certified that he had last seen Mrs Mellor alive on the day of her death, although he made the entry on the wrong part of the form.
Mrs Mellor's body was buried in a family plot at Hyde Cemetery. Following Shipman's arrest, the body was exhumed and Dr Rutherford carried out his post-mortem examination. Although the body was quite badly decomposed, Dr Rutherford was able to say that the signs that would have been expected following a death from intracerebral haemorrhage were not present. He could not say whether Mrs Mellor might have suffered a cerebral infarct, as the signs of this are often difficult to detect at post-mortem examination, even where this is carried out promptly. After a lapse of time of four years, they would not be detectable. However, such an event does not usually cause sudden death. Dr Rutherford found a moderate degree of coronary artery atherosclerosis. This was of a degree which could result in sudden death, but was by no means likely to do so. Thus, his examination could not confirm or refute the cause of death certified by Shipman.
However, samples were taken for toxicological examination. Ms Evans found morphine in the tissue samples taken from the liver and thigh muscle. When Dr Rutherford learned of those results, he expressed the view that the cause of death was morphine toxicity.
Dr Grenville reviewed Mrs Mellor's medical notes and found no record of her having been given morphine in any form. Nor could he find any record relating to an illness that might have necessitated the prescription of morphine.
Conclusion
There can be no doubt in this case that Shipman unlawfully killed Mrs Mellor. The finding of morphine in the body tissues is powerful evidence. There is no apparent explanation for it within the medical records. Shipman admitted that he had visited Mrs Mellor shortly before her death, but described her state of health in such terms as would provide no explanation for the administration of morphine. The manner of her death was entirely typical of many cases in which Shipman killed by means of lethal injection, probably administered in the form of diamorphine, to which he had ready access. I believe he must have killed her on his second visit that day.
The medical records are also of interest. On the day of the death, it appears that Shipman took blood samples. I have little doubt that he used a supposed need to take a blood sample as an excuse to introduce a needle into one of Mrs Mellor's veins to inject her with diamorphine. I note also that, in the computerised records, he suggested that Mrs Mellor had complained of transient ischaemic attacks. There is no reference to these in the handwritten records. I have little doubt that Shipman fabricated this computerised entry in order to create the impression that Mrs Mellor was at increased risk of suffering a stroke.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001