The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Emily Morgan
Introduction
Mrs Emily Morgan died at her home, 8 Mansfield Road, Hyde on Wednesday, 12th
May 1993 at the age of 84. She was a widow who lived alone in sheltered accommodation. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
In October 1998, Mrs Morgan's son-in-law, Mr Derek Marshall, contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances of Mrs Morgan's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Marshall, Mrs Beryl Marshall (Mrs Morgan's daughter) and Mrs Florence Waters (Mrs Morgan's next door neighbour). Shipman was not prosecuted for causing Mrs Morgan's death but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken additional statements from Mr and Mrs Marshall. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Morgan's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Morgan's general health had been poor for about six years before her death and she may have suffered minor strokes. She also suffered from arthritis. From time to time she fell. When this happened, she would call for the warden by activating the alarm device she wore around her neck. Her falls also resulted in occasional home visits from Shipman. However, she did not like doctors and would not call him out of her own volition. She received monthly injections for pernicious anaemia, administered by the district nurse.
The medical records show that Shipman does not appear to have taken Mrs Morgan's blood pressure since 1988. For some time, she was under the supervision of the Geriatric Department at Tameside District Hospital. She was discharged from their care in September 1991 with a recommendation that she should continue to take medication for insomnia and arthritis and Lasikal, which is a diuretic. It is not clear why this was recommended, as there was at the time no sign of heart failure. Shipman does not appear to have seen Mrs Morgan between 25th
November 1992, when it is recorded that she had had another fall, and 11th
May 1993, the day before her death.
Although living at home, Mrs Morgan needed a good deal of care. Mrs Marshall visited every day. She and others did all the household chores. At some stage, Shipman told Mrs Marshall that her mother had suffered a number of minor strokes but had refused hospital treatment. Mrs Marshall cannot recall when this was. It did not surprise her as her mother hated hospitals.
Mrs Morgan had a relative, Mrs Betty Hillson, who called on her every day at about lunchtime. She would help her with her meal and keep her company. Mrs Hillson died in 1994. Mrs Morgan's next door neighbour, Mrs Waters, also called on her regularly.
It appears highly likely that Shipman visited Mrs Morgan on 11th
May 1993, the day before her death. The surgery visits book for that day records a request for him to visit. The entry suggests that Mrs Morgan may have had a fall. It reads:
'Emily Morgan 8 Mansfield Rd Hyde - not been well all
night. Nurse said wants you to look at face. Been on floor'
.
For 11th
May, Shipman has written in the medical records:
'11/5/93 V
(
visit
)
Fell in night
now L arm weak
L ankle oedema power
L
spine OK
falls to L when walks
minor C.V.A
: review'
.
Mrs Marshall recalls that she visited her mother on 11th
May and found her in good spirits. She took Mrs Morgan an evening meal, helped her to have a bath and then put her to bed. Mrs Morgan cannot now remember if her mother mentioned that Shipman had visited her that day or had said he would be visiting her the following day.
The Day of the Death
For 12th
May, the day of the death, there is an entry in the visits book listing a 'revisit' for Mrs Morgan.
Some of the events of 12th
May are described to the Inquiry by means of Mrs Marshall's recollection of what Mrs Hillson told her soon after the death. On learning that Mrs Morgan had died on the afternoon of 12th
May, Mrs Hillson told Mrs Marshall that she had been with Mrs Morgan until 2.40pm that day and had found her well. Mrs Marshall makes the point that had Mrs Morgan been at all unwell, Mrs Hillson would have stayed with her and would have telephoned to inform Mrs Marshall.
Mr and Mrs Marshall also told the Inquiry that Mrs Waters told them that she saw Shipman arriving at Mrs Morgan's bungalow very soon after Mrs Hillson had left. However, she told the police that she noticed Shipman's car outside the bungalow soon after Mrs Hillson's departure. The difference does not matter. Mrs Waters told the police that she had been intending to go round to Mrs Morgan's in the early afternoon but when she saw the car outside, she waited. A while later, she looked out and saw the doctor sitting in his car. She decided to go to visit her friend. As she entered the house, she saw Mrs Morgan sitting in her armchair as though asleep. She was fully dressed. Mrs Waters patted Mrs Morgan's shoulder and called her name but there was no response. Mrs Waters went outside and found the doctor's car was still there. She asked him to come back to Mrs Morgan's house. They went in together. Shipman went over to Mrs Morgan and said, 'I think there's something wrong.' It did not appear to Mrs Waters that he examined Mrs Morgan. He then turned, shook his head, and Mrs Waters realised that Mrs Morgan was dead.
Shipman asked Mrs Waters if she could contact the relatives. Mrs Waters telephoned Mr Marshall. Mr Marshall estimates that he received that call at about 3.45pm. He collected his wife from work and they went to Mrs Morgan's house. They found her sitting in a chair with her head to one side. She gave the appearance of being asleep.
Shipman's entry in the medical records read as follows:
'12.5.93 V
(
visit
)
fell
again in night
CVA definite
130/80
refuses hospital
reflexes (R)
(L)
Plantars
Conscious. refuses hospital
admission
repeat visit mane
(
morning
)
15.35 declared dead
1) CVA
2) RhA'
.
This record suggests that Mrs Morgan now had definite signs of a left-sided stroke, the early signs of which he had noted the previous day. He said that Mrs Morgan was conscious and refused to go to hospital. He intended to visit her the following morning. There was no reference to any arrangements for her care in the light of her refusal to go to hospital.
This note and the one dated 11th
May must be regarded with some suspicion, if only because Shipman is known to have fabricated entries in the records to lend plausibility to a supposedly natural cause of death after a killing. Here, the entry which suggests a second fall on the night of the 11th
to 12th
with definite signs of a stroke arouses some suspicion as, if the signs of a stroke had been obvious, one might have expected Mrs Hillson to feel some concern and to have stayed with Mrs Morgan or telephoned Mrs Marshall. The refusal of hospital admission may not have surprised Mrs Marshall, but the fact that the refusal is twice noted suggests Shipman was keen to record it. That Shipman should make no arrangements for the care of a stroke patient who refused hospital admission, makes me suspect that the note was fabricated. In any event, it is highly unlikely that Mrs Morgan would have died suddenly within seconds of Shipman's departure if she were suffering from a developing stroke. Dr John Grenville has explained, in his generic evidence, that a developing stroke usually progresses gradually and the process takes two to three days. The only type of stroke that leads to a sudden death is in the brain stem and, if Shipman's note is genuine, Mrs Morgan was not suffering from that type of stroke.
The Aftermath
The following day, Mr and Mrs Marshall went to see Shipman at his surgery to collect the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). He told them that Mrs Morgan was a poorly woman and that it had only been a matter of time before she died. They cannot remember whether he then said that she had refused hospital admission. They were both very upset and surprised at the suddenness of the death. Shipman said nothing about a post-mortem examination.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been recovered. Shipman certified the death as being due to a cerebrovascular accident, with rheumatoid arthritis contributing to the death but not related to its immediate cause. In other words, he was saying that Mrs Morgan had died of a stroke.
On Form B of the cremation certificate, Shipman stated that the death had occurred at 3.35pm. However, in the medical records, he stated that Mrs Morgan was declared dead at 3.35pm, which implies that death had taken place some time earlier. On Form B, he said he had been attending the deceased for 48 hours during her last illness. He said he had last seen her alive half an hour before death and saw the body about five to ten minutes after death. He said that the mode of death was syncope lasting minutes. He said he knew of the cause and mode of death partly from his own observations and partly from those of a neighbour. (He must have meant Mrs Waters, although it is hard to see what she could have told him on those topics.) He said that no one was present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Both the medical records and the cremation certificate have been seen by Professor Richard Baker, who finds the case highly suspicious on both counts. Assessing the records, he was suspicious because the stroke, if there was such, appeared minor and there was no evidence of progression before death. Also, no ambulance was called.
Conclusion
Mrs Morgan was not in the best of health and it may be that she had not long to live. However, I have come to the conclusion that her death was not natural.
Shipman's account of events and explanation for the death, as appearing in the medical records and Form B, are not consistent with the observations of witnesses.
First, Shipman claims that Mrs Morgan was showing signs of a stroke on 11th
May. However, her daughter who put her to bed that night was unaware of any such signs. Second, Shipman claims that, when he arrived on the afternoon of 12th
May, Mrs Morgan was showing even clearer signs of a stroke. Yet Mrs Hillson, who had been with her until a few minutes before he arrived, was unaware of any such signs. I do not believe Mrs Morgan showed the signs Shipman claimed to have observed. Third, Shipman claims to have advised that admission to hospital was necessary and that Mrs Morgan refused. Yet he failed to take the most obvious steps to persuade her, such as suggesting that he should speak to the warden or to her daughter. If he really thought she had a developing stroke, it would have been quite disgraceful for him not to make some arrangements for her care, for example by speaking to the warden. Fourth, a developing stroke does not result in a sudden death, over a period of minutes. As Dr Grenville has explained, death from a developing stroke usually takes place over a period of two to three days. I am quite satisfied that Mrs Morgan's last illness and death did not occur as Shipman claimed.
It is possible, although unlikely, that Mrs Morgan might have died suddenly from some other natural cause. However, her death occurred within the very short period between the departure of Mrs Hillson and the arrival of Mrs Waters. For virtually the whole of that period, Shipman was alone with Mrs Morgan. It is stretching coincidence too far to suggest that Mrs Morgan might have died naturally within the few minutes between Shipman's departure and Mrs Waters' arrival. It seems clear that Mrs Morgan died while Shipman was alone with her and he walked out and left someone to find her body. No honest doctor would do that. No doubt, Shipman thought it would be some time before the body was found and the death would not be too closely associated with his visit. In the event, Mrs Waters' discovery of the body, while he was still sitting outside in his car, provided an extremely close association.
Shipman had the opportunity to give a lethal injection while he was alone with Mrs Morgan. Her appearance in death was very similar to the appearance of many of Shipman's victims, who are known to have been killed by diamorphine injection. It was not typical of a person who had suffered a sudden death as the result of heart attack or stroke.
For those reasons, and because I regard it as extremely unlikely that Mrs Morgan could have died naturally in the few minutes after Shipman left her house, I feel driven to say that I am sure he killed her.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001