The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Martha Marley
Introduction
Mrs Martha Marley died at her home, 10 Mona Street, Hyde on Tuesday, 24th
March 1998 at the age of 88. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought very highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was old age.
In August 1998, the Greater Manchester Police investigated all deaths certified by Shipman in the 12 months prior to the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy. Mrs Marley's death was one of those deaths. The police took statements from Mr James Edwin Siddelley (Mrs Marley's son-in-law) and Detective Sergeant John Ashley (a computer expert with the Greater Manchester Police).
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Marley but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Siddelley, his wife, Mrs Christine Anne Siddelley (Mrs Marley's daughter), Mr David Gill (a paramedic based at the Dukinfield Ambulance Station), Mrs Carol Chapman (a receptionist at the Market Street Surgery) and Mrs Judith Swann (listed in the surgery appointments book as one of Shipman's last afternoon appointments for Tuesday, 24th
March 1998). Mr Siddelley also supplied the Inquiry with his own written account of events in a document entitled 'Report to the Laming Inquiry into issues surrounding the Harold Shipman case' ('Report to the Laming Inquiry'). The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Marley's general practitioner, hospital and ambulance records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. Mrs Marley's telephone billing records for the day of her death are also available. The Inquiry has obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Marley was widowed in November 1996, after which she lived alone at Mona Street. She suffered from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma, conditions which were regularly monitored by Sister Gillian Morgan, the practice nurse at Shipman's surgery.
Following a high tibial osteotomy in February 1987, Mrs Marley became increasingly immobile and, in October or November 1996, a stairlift was fitted in her house. Following her husband's death in 1996, Mrs Marley was virtually housebound because she could not drive and she could not walk any distance. Mrs Siddelley and members of the church which Mrs Marley attended used to take her out by car.
At the end of March 1997, Mrs Siddelley took early retirement in order to spend more time looking after her mother. Mrs Marley was still able to cook for herself but Mrs Siddelley would help her with her shopping, housework and gardening, at least two days a week. On the days that Mrs Siddelley did not see her mother, she would telephone her twice, once at about 9am and again at about 6pm. Mrs Marley had a telephone next to the chair in which she usually sat.
Mrs Siddelley recalls that between the time of her father's death in November 1996 and her mother's death 16 months later, her mother had only attended at the surgery on two or three occasions, for six-monthly appointments with the practice nurse. The computerised medical records confirm Mrs Marley's regular attendance at the chronic obstructive airways disease clinic and asthma clinic. Chronic obstructive airways disease and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease are interchangeable expressions. Mrs Marley's final attendance at the Market Street Surgery appears to have been on 22nd
October 1997. On that day, the records suggest that she saw both Shipman and Sister Morgan. Mrs Siddelley recalls that during the appointment with the nurse, Shipman was asked to examine Mrs Marley because Sister Morgan thought that she looked unwell. The penultimate entry in the computerised medical records is dated 12th
March 1998 and is discussed below.
In her statement to the Inquiry, Mrs Siddelley says that her only criticism of Shipman was that he did not visit her mother at home. It was her understanding that once a patient reached 85, they would be visited at home each month by the doctor. As far as she is aware, Shipman never visited her mother at home, either by appointment or unannounced. She says that she is sure that Mrs Marley would have mentioned it to her if he had. Mrs Siddelley's evidence is contradicted by what her husband said in his Report to the Laming Inquiry, in which he said of his mother-in-law:
'Dr Shipman was in the habit of calling of
(
sic
)
he was in the area, simply to ask how she was getting on, and to say hello. She was surprised, and then delighted at this level of service. It is no exaggeration to say that when Dr Shipman called he was always welcomed. The day lit up, then - and afterwards. Moreover, within her circle of ageing friends and acquaintances, this was the general impression formed of his style of doctoring'
.
In his statement to the Inquiry, Mr Siddelley says:
'Shipman popped in to see my mother-in-law from time to time, that was his practice - his modus operandi, as a good GP. When he called it was a matter of joy'
.
Medical records should be a complete record of contact between doctor and patient. If these are complete, it would appear that Mrs Siddelley's recollection is the more accurate. In the three years preceding her death, I can find only one reference to a home visit to Mrs Marley in the medical records. This was on 23rd
December 1996, when Shipman visited her at home on account of an upper respiratory tract infection or common cold. Mrs Marley's name appears in the visits book for that day. Of course, it is possible that Shipman made a number of unscheduled visits of a semi-social nature, but I think it is unlikely that he would have done so without ever making any note in either the visits book or medical records. Mrs Marley's name does not appear in the visits book in the six month period before her death. I think it likely that Mrs Siddelley's evidence is the more accurate on this point. I am sure she spent more time with her mother than did her husband and must have had a more detailed knowledge of her affairs. It may be that Mr Siddelley was aware of Shipman's general propensity to visit patients at home and assumed that this also applied to his mother-in-law.
Mrs Marley spent the afternoon of Mother's Day, Sunday, 22nd
March 1998, at Mr and Mrs Siddelley's house. She appeared to be well, although her knee was causing trouble. Mr Siddelley drove her home that evening. Mrs Siddelley spoke to her mother over the telephone on the morning and evening of Monday, 23rd
March 1998.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Siddelley recalls that she last spoke to her mother on the morning of Tuesday, 24th
March 1998 at about 9am. In his Report to the Laming Inquiry, Mr Siddelley said that he thought his wife had last spoken to her mother at about 4pm. He makes no mention of a telephone call at 4pm in his statement to the Inquiry and it is likely that the last contact between Mrs Siddelley and Mrs Marley was at 9am, as Mrs Siddelley remembers. During their last conversation Mrs Marley appeared to be well, although Mrs Siddelley says that even if her mother had not been feeling well, she would probably not have said so. Mrs Siddelley was taking an examination that day and Mrs Marley would not have wanted to worry her.
At about 6pm, Mrs Siddelley tried to telephone her mother but there was no reply. She tried again half an hour later but there was still no reply. She drove to the house, arriving at around 6.45pm. The curtains were open and there were no lights on. Sunset would have been at about 6.30pm and the fact that the lights were not on does not greatly assist in deducing the time of Mrs Marley's death. The door was locked and Mrs Siddelley used her key to enter. She found her mother sitting in her usual chair by the fire, in a room at the back of the house. On the shelf next to her were a cup of water and her telephone. The fire was on but the television was not. Mrs Marley was wearing her normal day clothes and an apron. She looked relaxed and comfortable as though she was asleep. Her arms were resting on the sides of the chair. She normally wore glasses for reading. Mrs Siddelley is fairly sure that she was not wearing them. If she had been, Mrs Siddelley would have removed them and would have remembered doing so. There was a newspaper or magazine somewhere close to her, possibly on the floor. Mrs Siddelley shook her mother gently to rouse her. When she did not waken, Mrs Siddelley thought that her mother might be in a coma. She telephoned her husband, who said that he would call the emergency services. Records confirm that a telephone call was made from Mrs Marley's telephone to the Siddelleys' home at 6.52pm. While waiting for the emergency services to arrive Mrs Siddelley held her mother's hand which was warm and at some point touched her cheek, which also seemed to be warm.
When the ambulance arrived, the paramedics examined Mrs Marley and, at 7.08pm, recorded that they had found no signs of life. Shipman was called, probably by the paramedics. When he arrived he spoke to the paramedics. Mr Gill recalls that Shipman said,
'We'll put this one down to old age'
. Mr Gill thought this was rather an unusual comment.
Shipman then spoke to Mrs Siddelley. He expressed his sympathy and asked whether or not she wanted a post-mortem examination to be performed. She cannot remember exactly what he said about a post-mortem examination but says that if Shipman had said to her that he thought that there ought to be one, she would have agreed. Mr Siddelley says that he was present when Shipman arrived and during the discussion about the post-mortem examination. He recalls the conversation in the following way:
'He told us that he had no difficulty in certifying the death as my mother-in-law was 88, had been ill for many years and had a number of things wrong with her; her heart was weak and had probably stopped. He said that he would put old age as the cause of death. However, he went on to say that if we felt this was not satisfactory and wanted to know precisely how she had died, he would arrange a post mortem - it was put into the frame by him. He explained that the advantage of a post mortem was that we would find out exactly why my mother-in-law died, but the disadvantage was that it would take more time, would disfigure the body, would cause uncertainty in the meantime, and would cost, not us, but the public system. He said he did not think a post mortem was necessary, but it was our decision'
.
It appears that it was decided that there would not be a post-mortem examination. Mr Siddelley's account seems to me to have the ring of truth and is not unlike a number of other reports of Shipman's discussion about a post-mortem examination. If that is what Shipman said, it was quite improper. The decision is not a matter for the family. It is for the doctor to decide whether to refer the case to the coroner and he should do so if he cannot properly certify the cause of death. Shipman's technique on this and other similar occasions seems designed to lead the relatives away from a post-mortem examination and yet to leave them with the impression that they have made the decision.
Mrs Siddelley says that following her mother's death, the neighbours came round to the house. They were all shocked at the news, but Mrs Siddelley cannot recall that anyone said anything which shed light on how her mother had died. Mr Siddelley says that he does not know whether Shipman visited his mother-in-law on the day of her death. He thinks the neighbours would have noticed if Shipman visited.
The only telephone call made from Mrs Marley's house on 24th
March prior to the one at 6.52pm was made at 10.48am. This was to a number which Mrs Marley had called on several occasions in the preceding weeks. It was unrelated to Shipman and was probably a social call.
The final entry in the computerised medical records reads as follows:
'O/E - dead
daughter rang 1800 as ususal
(
sic
)
no reply 1830 found her
paramedica present ecg flat old age bp copd'
.
That entry was created at 8.47am on 25th
March 1998.
Shipman's Movements on the Day of Death
According to the appointments sheets, Shipman had a very busy morning and would have been unlikely to finish his open surgery before 11.15am or possibly later. He was required in the surgery again at noon for the antenatal clinic, which he shared with the midwife. It is possible, but unlikely, that he went out on visits in the morning. He would probably have finished his part of the antenatal clinic by between 12.30pm and 12.45pm. He would then have been free until 2pm, when he had scheduled the first of two appointments. The second was due to start at 2.30pm. He would then have been free to visit patients at home from about 2.45pm until 4pm when afternoon surgery was due to begin. That would have continued until about 6pm.
Mrs Marley's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for the day of the death. He had only two patients to visit. Both lived quite close to Mrs Marley. In particular, one lived in Haughton Street, which is very close to Mona Street, which is itself close to Market Street. The computerised entries relating to those visits were made at about 3.35pm, which would suggest that Shipman had by then made those visits and returned to the surgery.
In summary, although Shipman had a busy day in the surgery, he had only two visits, neither of which was far from Market Street. He would easily have had time to fit in a visit to Mrs Marley had he chosen to make one. He would not have needed to take his car as the distance from the surgery was so short. Probably the most convenient time for his visit, if he made one, would have been in the mid-afternoon. It is also possible that he left the surgery shortly before 6pm and visited Mrs Marley on his way home.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) on 24th
March 1998. He certified that the death occurred on that day. He said that the cause of death was old age and that hypertension and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease had contributed to the death. He said that he had last seen Mrs Marley alive on 12th March. He had seen the body after death and there would not be a post-mortem examination.
Shipman completed cremation Form B on 25th
March. He stated that Mrs Marley had died at 5.30pm. He claimed that he had attended her during her last illness for 12 months. He claimed to have last seen Mrs Marley alive on 12th
March 1998, 12 days before her death. Shipman said that he had seen Mrs Marley's body about 45 minutes after death and that he had carried out a complete external examination of the body. The certified causes of death were as stated on the MCCD. The mode of death was said to be syncope lasting minutes. As he also said that no one was present at the moment of death, this must have been based on supposition. When asked whether his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others, Shipman did not answer the question but wrote:
'Found by daughter when she failed
to answer telephone.
Paramedics confirmed death. Sat with
newspaper on knee tea on arm of chair-dead'
.
Shipman recorded that no one had nursed Mrs Marley during her last illness.
There is an entry in Mrs Marley's computerised medical records for 12th
March 1998, the day on which Shipman claimed he had last seen her alive. It says:
'12/03/98 9N2 Seen by health carer...
well'
.
That entry is curious in two respects. First, the record contains what is, in my experience of medical records kept by Shipman, the only reference to a health carer. Dr Grenville says that in the general practice medical records of almost 200 of Shipman's deceased patients, he has not previously seen the read code entry
'Seen by health carer'
. Mrs Chapman examined the entry and says that she does not know who the health carer could have been. There was a health visitor at the practice, but Mrs Chapman is confident that any entry relating to a consultation with the health visitor would have been referred to as such. Mrs Chapman has speculated that the health carer might possibly have been an employee of Social Services, perhaps a home help.
Second, the entry was created at 8.48am on 25th
March 1998, the day after Mrs Marley died, immediately after an entry had been made concerning the discovery of her dead body. This was 13 days after the supposed consultation with the health carer. Mrs Chapman has suggested that it is possible that the health carer sent a letter to the practice stating that he or she had visited Mrs Marley and that Shipman might have looked at the letter and asked one of the members of staff to make an entry in the computerised medical records. That would account for the delay. Indeed it would, but it would be remarkable that the entry had been made only seconds after Shipman himself had made the entry relating to the death. In any event, the letter has not been kept with the records, as would be usual practice. It appears also that the entry was not created following a telephone call to the surgery because, according to Mrs Chapman, such a telephone call would have been recorded in the acute prescriptions book and there is no such record.
It is clear to me that this entry was made that morning in order to support Shipman's claim on the MCCD and Form B that he had seen Mrs Marley alive on that day. It seems that he made the entry rather carelessly. It would appear that Shipman had not seen Mrs Marley since the previous October.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville notes the history of chronic obstructive airways disease and Mrs Marley's regular appointments with the practice nurse. He says that the medical records show that her condition was stable. Dr Grenville also notes the diagnosis of congestive heart failure made by Shipman on 7th
January 1994. He says that this appears to be based entirely upon a finding of oedema and notes that a very small dose of enalapril was prescribed and continued up until Mrs Marley's death.
Dr Grenville notes that Mrs Marley rarely visited the surgery other than for the monitoring of her chronic obstructive airways disease. He also notes the entry dated 22nd
October 1997 in the computerised records which suggested that Mrs Marley was seen by both Sister Morgan and Shipman. That is confirmed by Mrs Siddelley's statement. Dr Grenville notes that the recorded blood pressure readings were all within the normal range and there was no suggestion of hypertension as claimed by Shipman on the MCCD. Dr Grenville says that the observation
'accept BP'
following the consultation on 22nd
October 1997 must be taken to mean that Shipman did not feel that Mrs Marley's blood pressure was being lowered to an unacceptable level by the enalapril that she was taking.
Dr Grenville notes the entry in the computerised medical records dated 12th
March 1998 and concludes that it was
'obviously falsified'.
Dr Grenville says that old age was not an acceptable cause of death in Mrs Marley's case. She did not fit the circumstances in which the cause of death can be given as old age, as described in his generic evidence. Shipman said on Form B that he had been attending Mrs Marley during her last illness for 12 months. The implication of this is that Mrs Marley had been suffering the signs of old age for 12 months, which she had not. Dr Grenville says that there was no evidence that Mrs Marley suffered from hypertension and that should not have been recorded as a condition contributing to death. He says that it is possible that the word he has interpreted as hypertension is in fact hypotension, although Professor Richard Baker and the registrar agreed that it appeared to be hypertension. Even if the word was hypotension, Dr Grenville says that this should not have been recorded as a condition contributing to death because the only way in which hypotension can contribute to death in an elderly patient is if it has caused them to faint and to fall, leading to a fatal injury. Dr Grenville is of the opinion that it was mandatory to report this case to the coroner.
Dr Grenville notes that it is unusual for patients to be found sitting in a chair looking peaceful following death due to natural causes. This can happen but it is rare. The position in which Mrs Marley was found was consistent with death from intravenous injection of a lethal dose of opiate.
Professor Baker considered Mrs Marley's medical records and then separately the cremation forms. On the basis of each, he concluded that the death was highly suspicious. He commented:
'Rather weak relation - age 89, had copd
(
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
)
but otherwise little remarkable in records... another sudden death in the afternoon'
.
Conclusion
There are a number of suspicious circumstances surrounding this death.
Mrs Marley was badly disabled by osteoarthritis and suffered from chronic obstructive airways disease. She had also been diagnosed by Shipman as having congestive heart failure but the diagnosis was based on rather slender evidence. If the diagnosis was correct, the condition was kept under very good control. There is nothing in her medical history to suggest that she was particularly at risk of sudden death by the two most common causes, heart attack or stroke. This does not mean that she cannot have died a sudden death, only that such an event was less likely for her than for others with risk factors. Her chronic obstructive airways disease was extremely stable. Her medical records show that she very rarely needed a doctor. This death was sudden and unexpected.
Shipman certified that Mrs Marley's death was due to old age. This was quite inappropriate. Mrs Marley was living a relatively independent life, with some support from her family. She was not confined to bed. She was mentally quite alert. She had not suffered the gradual decline which would make it appropriate for the doctor to certify death as due to old age. It must be a rare case in which a patient dies of old age alone at home and without ever having needed nursing care. Usually the patient will have been confined to bed for some time, will have required a high level of care and will be attended at the time of death by members of the family or other carers. Shipman admitted on Form B that Mrs Marley had not had nursing care. However, he sought to create the impression that she had declined gradually over a period of a year by claiming that he had attended her during that time in connection with her last illness, which he implied was old age. This was quite misleading.
I ask myself why Shipman chose to certify this death as due to old age in circumstances when he must have well known that it was not appropriate. It is possible that Mrs Marley had died a sudden natural death, in which case Shipman could have had little idea of the cause. Mrs Marley's medical history did not provide an explanation for any sudden death. There was no history of hypertension, heart disease or venous problems, such as might give rise to an embolism. The only way to find out the real cause would have been by referral to the coroner and post-mortem examination. Instead, Shipman decided not to refer the death but to certify the cause as old age. If he had certified the cause as heart attack or stroke, he might well have thought it necessary to fabricate some entries in the medical records to provide a background for his diagnosis. He had done that on a number of occasions. Instead, he chose old age. He seems to have felt that no great alteration of the medical history was necessary and all that was required was a claim on Form B that he had been attending Mrs Marley for 12 months in connection with her last illness.
I ask myself why any doctor would stoop to or even bother to make a misleading entry on an official form just for the sake of avoiding a referral to the coroner. If the death were natural, why would Shipman seek to avoid referral to the coroner? He often did make false entries in order to avoid referral in cases where there is no suspicion that he caused the death. The common form of false entry was to claim, as he did here, that he had seen the patient within 14 days of the death when he had not. He seemed to think that unless he could say this he would not be qualified to certify the cause of death. Why did he want to avoid referral to the coroner? I think in some cases he wished to spare the family the delay and emotional distress involved. But in this case, where a referral was clearly needed, Shipman did not seek to find out whether the family would be distressed at the thought of a post-mortem examination. He planted in their minds the idea that it would be better not to have a post-mortem examination. I conclude that Shipman's motive in seeking to avoid a post-mortem examination was connected with himself and not with the family. It is possible that he did not want to be bothered with the procedures involved. However, it is also possible that the death was not natural and he feared detection by toxicology if the initial autopsy did not provide an acceptable explanation for the death. Knowing, as I now know, that by March 1998 Shipman had already killed a great number of his patients, I think it far more likely that Shipman wished to avoid referral because he was guilty than because he could not be bothered with the procedures involved.
Mrs Marley's position and appearance in death were not typical of those seen following a sudden natural death from any of the common causes. Usually where a person dies of a heart attack or stroke, they have the time and opportunity to get up in an attempt to seek help. Mrs Marley appeared to have gone to sleep and showed no sign of an agonal event. Shipman emphasised her peaceful appearance in his description on Form B. This peaceful appearance is entirely typical of that of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by a lethal injection of opiate.
Further suspicion arises from Shipman's claim that he was able to estimate the time of death as 5.30pm. He would not have been able to do this. All he could properly have said was that Mrs Marley was known to have been alive at 9am when she spoke to her daughter and was probably dead at 6pm when she failed to answer the telephone. If there were no rigor mortis he would have been able to say that the death was more likely to have occurred in the afternoon than in the morning. Instead, he gave a precise time of death. I have found many cases in which Shipman has done this and I have formed the view that he usually did it in order to create the impression that the death occurred a considerable time after he had last been with the patient. He was distancing himself from the death. In this case, there is no evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Marley on the day of her death. If he did and if he killed her, he would not know whether or not he had been seen arriving at or leaving the house. At 5.30pm, he would have been in his surgery seeing patients. That Shipman should bother to pretend that he knew the time of death raises my level of suspicion.
If there were any evidence that Shipman had visited Mrs Marley on the day of her death, I would say that this was a typical Shipman killing. There is no such evidence. Nor is there any obvious prompt for a visit. Moreover, whilst it is well known that Shipman used to call in unannounced to see many patients and that such visits would not be routinely recorded in his visits book, I do not think he often called in on Mrs Marley. Thus, if Shipman did visit her that day, the reason is obscure. I am satisfied that Shipman had the time to visit her and that a visit would not have been inconvenient. I also think that a visit would not necessarily have been observed by the neighbours, particularly as it is quite possible Shipman did not take his car or did not leave it in Mona Street.
I must consider the time at which Shipman could have killed Mrs Marley. As I think Mrs Marley was already dead at 6pm when Mrs Siddelley telephoned her, Shipman must have visited her before 4pm, if he visited her at all. When Mrs Siddelley found the body at about 6.45pm, she formed the impression that the body was warm. That was about three hours after Shipman could have been there. The fire was on in the room but it would be surprising if the body still felt warm three hours after death. Mrs Siddelley's evidence that the body felt warm to the touch suggests that Shipman was not involved. I do not place great reliance on this evidence as it appears to me to be based largely on impression.
Taking all these factors into account, I conclude that Shipman probably killed Mrs Marley. The evidence of his falsehoods on Form B is readily explicable on the basis of guilt and is inconsistent with innocence. I stop short of saying that I am sure of that conclusion. There is no evidence that Shipman had access to Mrs Marley. I have inferred that he probably did. I also infer that he probably killed her by his usual method, an intravenous injection of opiate. I have borne in mind my knowledge that by March 1998, Shipman was and had for some years been an habitual killer.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001