The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Samuel Mills
Introduction
Mr Samuel Mills died on Saturday, 23rd
November 1996 at the age of 89. He was a widower and died at his first floor flat at 18 Ogden Court, Hyde, where he lived alone. Mr Mills had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He thought that Shipman was a good doctor and very caring. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Mills' death was carcinomatosis resulting from adenocarcinoma of the prostate.
The police decided to investigate Mr Mills' death in October 1998 after Mrs Sandra Christine Simpson, the resident warden at Ogden Court, had reported that Shipman had been involved in a number of deaths that occurred there. They took statements from Mr William Mills (Mr Mills' son), Mr Alan Simpson (husband of Mrs Simpson) and Mrs Gillian Jones (the mobile warden who was on duty at the time of the death).
There was no prosecution arising from the death but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has obtained statements from Mr Samuel Mills junior, Professor Benjamin Mills and Mr William Mills (Mr Mills' three sons), Mrs Sheila Mills (Mr William Mills' wife), Mrs Ann Bowler (Mr Mills' sister), Mr Frank Bowler (husband of Mrs Ann Bowler), Mrs Simpson and Mrs Jones. Professor Mills, Mr William Mills, Mr Simpson and Mrs Jones gave oral evidence at a hearing on 16th
October 2001. The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Mills' general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. In addition, the Inquiry has access to the mobile warden incident report and the Ogden Court diary. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville, who gave oral evidence on 12th
November 2001.
Personal Background
Ogden Court consists of sheltered accommodation for the elderly, with warden supervision. When Mrs Simpson was off duty, there was a mobile warden service provided by a company called Eldercare.
In the 1950s and 1960s, Mr Mills had a duodenal ulcer and, subsequently, he had problems with a recurrent hernia. In 1969, he underwent a transurethral resection of the prostate gland (TURP). In 1973, two basal cell carcinomas on his cheeks were treated successfully. On 11th
January 1994, there appears in the computerised record the first reference to congestive heart failure and there are intermittent references to that condition throughout the subsequent years. In February 1994, Mr Mills was anaemic and, in November 1994, there was a diagnosis of pernicious anaemia, which was thereafter treated with regular intramuscular injections. The duodenal ulcer recurred in 1994. In February 1995, he was found to have another basal cell carcinoma, this time of the nasal root, and he underwent treatment for that condition, again with apparent success.
On 24th
April 1996, there is a reference to further prostate problems. Mr Mills suffered from retention of urine, which became painful and, in May 1996, he underwent hospital investigations and was fitted with a catheter. In June 1996, cancer of the prostate was diagnosed. His cancer was poorly differentiated and, in a man of Mr Mills' age, would have had a poor prognosis. It is not clear to what extent Mr Mills fully understood the diagnosis or the consequences of his refusal to undergo a further TURP. In any event, that decision was taken and this meant long-term catheterisation. He was started on monthly hormonal implants in an attempt to reduce the rate of growth of his cancer.
The Events of the Weeks Leading up to Death
Mr Mills attended an outpatient appointment on 29th
October 1996 when the senior house officer at Stepping Hill Hospital, who wrote to Shipman, said he was
'doing alright'
. He was said to have no skeletal pain. He had hoped to have his catheter removed at this appointment and was disappointed that this did not occur. A blood sample taken on 29th
October 1996 was found to have a markedly increased level of PSA (prostatic specific antigen) suggesting that the cancer was growing or becoming more active. A further PSA test performed by Shipman on 7th
November showed that the level had increased still further. However, according to Dr Grenville, there is no evidence that the cancer had spread beyond the prostate gland. Had it spread into the bones, as is quite common, it would have caused pain. There is no evidence that Mr Mills was in pain. Had it spread to the brain, one would have expected neurological signs.
The consultation with Shipman on 7th
November appears to have been the last before Mr Mills' death. There is an entry dated 8th
November, but this seems to relate to a hospital letter of that date, which was received in the surgery on 13th
November.
Members of his family say that Mr Mills was fit and agile for his age, would take his grandchildren for walks when he visited and was able to look after himself without assistance. He was president of Hyde United Supporters Club and regularly attended football matches. He used public transport to visit friends and do his shopping. He visited a public house regularly. Although it is said that he did less walking in the weeks prior to his death, the family attributed this to the poor weather. He is said to have been alert, contented and happy with life. I think the descriptions I have been given must relate to the situation a few weeks before Mr Mills' death.
The family was unaware that Mr Mills had cancer, although they knew that he had prostate problems. Both Mr and Mrs Simpson seem to have known the true nature of the illness. Members of the family had noticed that Mr Mills had lost weight and were concerned about it.
Mrs Simpson's diary discloses a rather different picture from that painted by the family. There are a number of references in the weeks prior to Mr Mills' death to his being
'very frail'
, and
'not too good'
and his admitting that he was feeling
'rough'
. In the last week or two of his life, he needed assistance with his household chores. It is clear from the diary that a nurse visited to help with his catheter, although the district nursing notes cannot be traced. On 21st
November, the Ogden Court diary records that Mr Mills was:
'Not too good - neighbours doing his washing'
.
The following day, the entry reads:
'Doesn't look too good, says he feels
dizzy, has told his GP will see how it goes!'
.
Dr Grenville points out that the diary records no symptoms such as skeletal pain, which might suggest the spread of cancer beyond the prostate gland. However, it seems to me that the complaint of dizziness could have been an early sign of cerebral metastasis. Dr Grenville observes that it could equally have been a symptom of an intercurrent illness.
On 22nd
November, the day before the death, one of Mr Mills' sons, Benjamin, visited him with his wife and observed that his father seemed well. In the evening, Mr Mills rang his other two sons, Samuel and William, as usual, and again seemed perfectly normal to them. He was planning to visit his son, Samuel, for lunch on the Sunday, as usual.
The Day of the Death
On 23rd
November, Mr Mills' brother-in-law, Mr Frank Bowler, who lived with his wife in Ogden Court, took some porridge for Mr Mills' breakfast. He believes that he called at about 9am and stayed for ten minutes. He recalls that Mr Mills seemed all right when he left and had not said that he felt unwell or was thinking of calling the doctor out.
At about 9am that morning, Mr Mills went down to the warden's flat on the ground floor. Mrs Simpson was out but Mr Simpson was there. Mr Mills told Mr Simpson that he felt very unwell and asked him to telephone Shipman. Mr Mills did not have a telephone in his flat. Mr Simpson promised to do so and Mr Mills returned to his flat on the first floor. Mr Simpson recalls that Mr Mills walked up the flight of stairs and did not use the lift. Mr Simpson telephoned the surgery and a receptionist promised that Shipman would be there in an hour. Mr Simpson then went to Mr Mills' room to tell him that Shipman was coming. The door was unlocked and he went in and asked if there was anything he could do. Mr Mills replied that there was not. Mr Simpson said that there was an air of forced cheerfulness about Mr Mills. He made a little joke about being a nuisance. He looked weary. Mr Simpson went back to his own flat and did not see Shipman arrive.
Ogden Court had one main entrance with a main and an internal door. The main door was kept locked at all times. Visitors had to ring the bell and wait for the door to be answered by Mr or Mrs Simpson or a resident. A mobile warden would have a pass key or might know the entry code used by the residents.
In the absence of the resident manager, an emergency call from a resident who had pulled his or her emergency cord within the flat would be routed through the resident manager's office to Eldercare control. Such an emergency call was received at 10.29 that morning. The message received was:
'gp with mr mills who is very ill'
.
Mrs Gillian Jones was employed by Eldercare as the mobile warden and relief manager for Ogden Court in Mrs Simpson's absence. That morning, Eldercare paged her and she responded by telephoning the control office immediately. She was told that she should go to the flat of Mr Mills, who was dying. She was told that his general practitioner would meet her there. She went straight to Ogden Court and into the flat. It took her about five to ten minutes and she thinks she arrived at about 10.40am. She found Mr Mills alone, lying on the floor, fully clothed, in the partial recovery position, that is mainly on his front but with his head on its side. His breathing was very shallow and there was blueness round his lips. He was not dead but was obviously dying. Mrs Jones comforted Mr Mills as best she could.
A few minutes later, Shipman appeared. After using a stethoscope to check for respiratory activity on a number of occasions, he pronounced Mr Mills dead. That was at 10.50am. Shipman then left, promising to return at noon.
Meanwhile, Mrs Simpson returned to Ogden Court and Mrs Jones told her what had happened. Mrs Simpson telephoned the home of Mr William Mills and spoke to his wife. She had previously received a call saying that Mr Mills was ill. The origin of that call is not known, but it might well have come from Eldercare. Mr William Mills and his wife went to Ogden Court, where Professor Mills and his wife joined them. Mrs Jones stayed to speak to the family and later filed an incident report.
When members of the family arrived, they observed that Mr Mills appeared very peaceful. He was dressed in normal day clothes and had shaved that morning. His bed was made and everything was tidy. Presently, Shipman arrived and said that Mr Mills had been 'riddled with cancer'. He said, possibly only to Mr William Mills, that he would have been able to save Mr Mills but he did not do so as Mr Mills would not have wanted to be in hospital 'attached to a lot of tubes'. He said that a post-mortem examination would not be necessary. He was very matter of fact. He did not tell the family that he had been called out that morning because Mr Mills had felt ill and Professor Mills did not realise that Shipman had been there earlier. There was no discussion about the site of the cancer.
The computerised note of Shipman's visit reads:
'Collapse...totao
(
sic
)
shut down died at 1050 mobilewarden present'
.
The Inquiry audit trail revealed that the entry was made at 10.56am on 23rd
November, which was very shortly after the death. There is no manuscript note relating to the death.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) stating that he had last seen Mr Mills alive on the date of his death. He said that the cause of death was carcinomatosis due to adenocarcinoma of the prostate.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He gave the time of death as
'1050 hrs'
, which accords with the account given by Mrs Jones. He stated that he attended the deceased for 12 months during his 'last illness'. In fact, the cancer had only been diagnosed five months earlier. He said he had been present at the death. He said that he saw the body immediately after death and made a complete external examination. He gave the mode of death as
'Syncope'
lasting
'minutes'
. He stated that the observations were his own and those of the mobile warden and that they were both present at the death. He incorrectly stated that Mr Mills had undergone a TURP six months previously. Mr Mills had declined that procedure and underwent catheterisation instead.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville said that there was no clear evidence that Mr Mills' cancer had spread from the prostate gland. He did not therefore have carcinomatosis. He had no skeletal pain. He was able to walk up and down stairs on the day of his death. He did not appear to have reached the terminal phase of his illness. Deaths from cancer of the prostate are not usually sudden, although a sudden death is possible, either from the cancer or from another natural cause. Usually the patient deteriorates gradually and needs pain relief. During the final stages, the patient becomes progressively weaker until he takes to his bed and fades away. Dr Grenville thinks that, judging from the state of his cancer, Mr Mills would have lived for another month or two.
In the medical note, Shipman claimed there had been a total shutdown by the time he arrived. That was only about an hour and a half after Shipman had been called. Dr Grenville said that this sudden death was not typical of death from cancer. He suggested that it was possible that Mr Mills could have suffered a sudden heart attack, pulmonary embolus or a ruptured aortic aneurysm. At his age, there was a risk of sudden death from such an event, although the medical history revealed no cause for a specially increased risk. Shipman had made no attempt at diagnosis or treatment.
Dr Grenville observed that Mrs Jones' description of Mr Mills in his dying moments was consistent with death following a lethal injection of opiate but was also consistent with death from any of the other natural causes of sudden death.
He considered the timing of Mr Mills' death. If Shipman had given an intravenous injection of strong opiate before pulling the cord to summon Eldercare, Dr Grenville would have expected Mr Mills to die before Mrs Jones arrived. However, if the injection had been given intramuscularly or subcutaneously, he might well have died about 20 minutes to half an hour after the injection. Dr Grenville also made the point that it can be very difficult to inject into the vein of a very old person, particularly if the patient is somewhat emaciated.
Conclusion
The circumstances of this death give rise to grave suspicion. There is no independent evidence that Mr Mills was close to death before Shipman arrived at his flat. When Eldercare received the message that Mr Mills was very ill, Shipman was with him. I am satisfied that it was Shipman who contacted Eldercare, just before 10.30am. Shipman must have told Eldercare that Mr Mills was dying. That was the message conveyed to Mrs Jones. It appears that the process of dying began while Shipman was present and this, in itself, gives rise to grave suspicion that he was responsible for the death. Other general practitioners find that deaths occur in their presence very rarely indeed. Death frequently occurred in Shipman's presence.
Mr Mills had a terminal illness but, as Dr Grenville has explained, he did not appear to have reached the final phase. His death on that morning was sudden and unexpected. Although a natural death cannot be positively ruled out, it seems very unlikely that Mr Mills died on that day as the result of cancer. It is also possible that he could have died naturally from some other cause of sudden death, such as heart attack or stroke, but there is no particular reason to suppose that he did.
The timing of events warrants consideration. I infer that Shipman was with Mr Mills at 10.29am when the message was received by Eldercare. At that time, Shipman said that Mr Mills was dying. If Shipman did kill Mr Mills, by lethal injection, it would seem more likely that he would have administered it before calling Eldercare than afterwards. Yet Mr Mills was still alive when Mrs Jones arrived at about 10.40am. He died about ten minutes later, that is more than 20 minutes after one would have expected the injection to be given. Dr Grenville has explained that an intravenous injection of a lethal dose of opiate will cause death within about five minutes of administration. I think it is unlikely that Mr Mills was given a lethal dose by the intravenous route. However, as Dr Grenville explained, it can sometimes be difficult to find a vein in an elderly or emaciated patient. It is therefore quite possible that Shipman decided to give an intramuscular injection or that he tried to give an intravenous injection but that this went wrong and the drug entered the body subcutaneously. In either event, it is entirely possible that it would have taken about 20-30 minutes for Mr Mills to die.
When Mrs Jones arrived, Shipman was not in sight. I do wonder what had been going on. If Shipman really had found Mr Mills seriously ill, it is extraordinary that he should leave him alone. He claimed that he could have saved Mr Mills. By doing what, one wonders? If Mr Mills were dying of carcinomatosis, there would be no question of 'saving' him. If he had had a heart attack, it might well have been possible to 'save' him by an emergency admission to hospital. I strongly suspect that the claim that Shipman could have saved Mr Mills was completely untrue and part of the display of power and knowledge that he often liked to show.
The medical records arouse suspicion. There is no adequate note of the consultation immediately preceding the death.
Taking these factors into account, I have been driven to the conclusion that Shipman killed Mr Mills, almost certainly by administering a lethal injection of diamorphine. I think it likely that Shipman found Mr Mills feeling unwell and low in spirits. He decided to kill him. He gave him an injection and called Eldercare to tell them that Mr Mills was dying. Then, for some reason, he left Mr Mills alone for a few minutes, during which time Mrs Jones arrived. Together they waited for the death, which Shipman knew was inevitable. Although it is theoretically possible that Mr Mills died a natural death that day, Shipman's presence at the death is so suspicious a factor that I am satisfied so as to be sure that he was responsible for the death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001