The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Pamela Grace Mottram
Introduction
Mrs Pamela Grace Mottram was found dead at her home at 6 Ward Street, Hyde on Monday, 22nd
July 1996 at the age of 57. Her husband had died suddenly only a fortnight before and since then she had lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman for many years.
Mrs Mottram's death did not form part of the police investigation into Shipman's activities. It came to the attention of the Inquiry in the course of a search of the files of the South Manchester Coroner for deaths which had been referred to him and where Shipman may have been involved in some way. It is clear from the records that it was Shipman who referred this death to the coroner, apparently because of his suspicion that Mrs Mottram might have committed suicide. The referral was followed by a post-mortem examination and toxicological investigations, which revealed no evidence of an ingestion of an excessive amount of any of the medications to which Mrs Mottram had access or of any commonly abused drugs. However, subsequent investigation by the Inquiry revealed that only the presence of a very high concentration of morphine would have been detected by the tests performed. A lethal dose might have been missed.
At post-mortem examination, the cause of death was said to be acute left ventricular failure resulting from ischaemic heart disease. An inquest followed, at which evidence was received from Mrs Suzette Margaret Cooper (a friend of Mrs Mottram), Miss Julie Winterbottom (a former neighbour and known at that time as Ms Julie Wilson) and PC Theresa King (a coroner's officer). Reports of the post-mortem and toxicological examinations were available to the coroner, who entered a verdict that Mrs Mottram had died of natural causes.
The Inquiry has obtained statements from Mrs Cooper, Miss Winterbottom, Mrs Margaret Wieland (a neighbour), Dr Michael William France (the consultant clinical pathologist who reported on the toxicological examination), and Mr David Gill and Ms Nicola Farrell (paramedics who attended after the death). Mrs Cooper, Mrs Wieland, Miss Winterbottom and Dr France gave oral evidence at a hearing on 4th
December 2001. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Mottram's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Professor Helen Whitwell, a consultant pathologist, who gave oral evidence on 7th
December 2001.
Personal Background
Mrs Mottram had a long and complex medical history. She was born with a congenital abnormality of the bladder, which required surgical intervention on a number of occasions. In 1961, she underwent a hysterectomy. In 1966, she had a nephrectomy. Thereafter, she suffered from a duodenal ulcer and from recurrent back pain. She also had problems with her eyes. In 1987, she was diagnosed as suffering from a cerebrovascular accident, although the diagnosis was not certain. Thereafter, she had episodes of loss of consciousness which were difficult to explain and were on occasions attributed, although not by Shipman, to psychological causes.
In December 1995, Mrs Mottram was admitted to hospital with chest pain. An electrocardiogram (ECG) proved normal and showed no ischaemic changes. The diagnosis was a chest infection with pleuritic pain. In March 1996, she suffered from a urinary tract infection and shortly afterwards was diagnosed as having acute pancreatitis. In April 1996, she was suffering from a tremor and was referred to Dr M P Chopra at Tameside General Hospital, who wrote to Shipman on 18th June 1996 to say that he did not think the tremor was significant. He proposed thyroid function tests, which were found to show normal results.
Mrs Mottram and her husband had been a very close and self-contained couple. Mrs Mottram had two sisters, of whom she saw little. Her mother was in a nursing home and she visited her from time to time. She worked as a caretaker at a pupil referral unit and it was through her work that she became friendly with Mrs Cooper. Mrs Cooper was aware that Mrs Mottram's state of health was not good, although it appears that Mrs Mottram carried out an active job and had a good attendance record.
The Weeks Leading up to Death
On Saturday, 6th
July 1996, Mrs Mottram and her husband went to a race meeting at Haydock Park with a group of people from the local Conservative Club. Mr Mottram went off to place a bet but never returned. Mrs Mottram and her companions searched for him and were eventually told that an ambulance had taken someone to hospital earlier in the day. They went to the hospital, where Mrs Mottram learned for the first time that her husband was dead. Naturally, she was extremely shocked and upset.
The following day her neighbour, Mrs Wieland, went to see her. She was worried about Mrs Mottram and telephoned Shipman to ask if he could come to see her. Mrs Wieland waited with Mrs Mottram until Shipman arrived and was most impressed that he came very quickly and was concerned and sympathetic when he arrived. She left Mrs Mottram with him. As Mrs Wieland left the house she noticed Shipman's car parked outside. Soon afterwards Mrs Cooper arrived at Mrs Mottram's house, having heard the news of Mr Mottram's death. She arrived just as Shipman was leaving. When he had gone, Mrs Mottram showed Mrs Cooper two small brown bottles of tablets, which Shipman had given her to settle her nerves. Although Shipman recorded his visit in Mrs Mottram's medical notes, he did not note that he had given her any tablets.
On 9th
July, Mrs Mottram requested a visit from Shipman. It appears that she told the receptionist that she was suffering from shock. If Shipman visited Mrs Mottram that day, he did not record his visit in the medical records.
In the period following Mr Mottram's death, Mrs Cooper visited Mrs Mottram daily and helped her to organise the funeral. Mrs Cooper was a trained bereavement counsellor. It was her view that although Mrs Mottram remained very upset at her loss, she was not suicidal. Mrs Wieland and Miss Winterbottom also saw and assisted Mrs Mottram during this period. Mr Mottram's funeral was on Monday, 15th
July and for the rest of that week Mrs Cooper continued to see Mrs Mottram every day. Mrs Mottram was planning to return to work and they discussed changes in her hours to make her return easier.
On Friday, 19th
July, Mrs Wieland and Miss Winterbottom went to Mrs Mottram's home together. Mrs Mottram was in bed and said that she was exhausted and wanted to catch up on her sleep. Later in the day Mrs Cooper visited Mrs Mottram, who seemed better. Mrs Cooper suggested that she would call on Mrs Mottram the following day but Mrs Mottram asked her not to, as she wanted to visit her husband's grave. It would be exactly two weeks since he had died. Later in the day Mrs Mottram called on Mrs Wieland and said she thought that she might go out for a drink that evening. Mrs Mottram arranged to meet Miss Winterbottom for a drink that evening but later changed her mind.
Mrs Wieland has a vague recollection that Mrs Mottram might have told her that she was expecting Shipman some time over the weekend. Mrs Cooper and Miss Winterbottom were unaware of that but both knew that she had an appointment to see Shipman on the following Monday. I think it is likely that Mrs Mottram mentioned to Mrs Wieland that she was to see Shipman after the weekend. It appears that Mrs Mottram had an appointment at 9.45am on Monday, 22nd
July. It is not known why the appointment had been made. Miss Winterbottom had arranged to accompany Mrs Mottram to the surgery.
The Weekend of the Death
There is no evidence from anyone who had contact with Mrs Mottram on Saturday, 20th
July. Her telephone billing records show no telephone calls from her number on 19th
, 20th
or 21st
July. On the Sunday Mrs Cooper telephoned Mrs Mottram on several occasions but there was no reply. Mrs Wieland did not see Mrs Mottram on either Saturday or Sunday. She did not regard that as unusual. In her witness statement she said that she had seen Shipman's car outside Mrs Mottram's house on one of these days, probably on Sunday. She did not see Shipman himself. However, when she gave oral evidence she seemed uncertain of this and agreed that she might have been confused about the day on which she had noticed the car. She might have seen the car on the Monday after that weekend.
The practice records suggest that Shipman was having a weekend off work. A locum carried out Saturday morning surgeries and the only visit requested that day. It is therefore unlikely, although not impossible, that Shipman visited Mrs Mottram on the Saturday. So far as Sunday is concerned, no visits are recorded in the visits book and the duty doctor diary shows no activity by Shipman or a deputising doctor. The Inquiry has no means of knowing whether Shipman might have visited Mrs Mottram over the weekend.
The Discovery of the Death
On the morning of Monday, 22nd
July, Mrs Wieland telephoned Mrs Mottram but recalls that the line was engaged. At about 9am, or possibly a little later, Miss Winterbottom went to collect Mrs Mottram to accompany her to Shipman's surgery. There was no reply to Miss Winterbottom's knock so she went to her mother's house nearby and telephoned Mrs Mottram. She thinks that the answering machine was on. She went back to Mrs Mottram's house, knocked and waited. Miss Winterbottom then looked through the net curtains and saw Mrs Mottram lying on the living room floor. In panic, she ran to Mrs Wieland's house. At about this time an insurance agent arrived at the house. Mrs Wieland brought her key and together the two women and the insurance agent entered the house. The front door had a mortise lock but no Yale-type lock. The door was locked but was opened by Mrs Wieland's key. The three found Mrs Mottram lying on the floor, dead. She was near the settee and was lying mainly on her front, as if in a recovery position. Her head was on a cushion. One arm was partly inside a jacket or coat or body warmer. It appeared that she had been in the process of putting on or taking off this garment.
At 10.41am, an ambulance was called and the paramedics pronounced Mrs Mottram dead at 10.55am. Their report contained the following comments:
'PT FOUND ON THE FLOOR. EVIDENCE OF POOLING AND RIGOR MORTIS. LOST HER HUSBAND 2 WEEKS AGO'
.
Shipman arrived shortly afterwards and it is thought that the police attended, although the sequence of events is not entirely clear. Shipman indicated that he could not certify the cause of death and telephoned the coroner's office. The telephone billing records show that the call was made at 11.24am. The coroner's officer, PC King, arrived at Mrs Mottram's house at about noon and Shipman attended and identified the body to her. PC King examined the body and made a search of the house, during which she found no trace of any suicide note and observed that there were various tablets in different parts of the house. Mrs Cooper, who was Mrs Mottram's executrix, came to the house and was asked by PC King to collect Mrs Mottram's medication. Mrs Cooper collected medication from the living room and from upstairs and then went into the kitchen. She put the bag of medication on the kitchen table. While she was looking in the cupboards, Shipman removed the two small brown bottles that Mrs Mottram had said he had given her on Sunday, 7th
July.
Mrs Cooper found that Mrs Mottram's dog and two cats had been locked in the house and, although a box of cat litter was kept in the bathroom, the animals had urinated and defecated in the house. There was a pungent smell. This would suggest that Mrs Mottram had been lying dead for some time.
The Aftermath
A post-mortem examination was carried out by Dr A J Yates at Tameside General Hospital. Toxicological tests were carried out by Dr France at Manchester Royal Infirmary. The reports were submitted to the coroner.
At the inquest, Mrs Cooper, Miss Winterbottom and PC King gave evidence. Shipman's reasons for referring the death to the coroner were explained in a letter dated 29th
July 1996. He said that there was no good physical reason for Mrs Mottram's death and there was a possibility that she had committed suicide, such was the intensity of her grief after the death of her husband. He suggested that this had gone beyond a normal reaction.
In the event, the toxicological examination revealed no evidence of a drug-related death. The post-mortem examination report showed an autolysed brain and moderately oedematous lungs. The heart was said to be slightly enlarged, although Professor Whitwell was later to say that at 380g it was at the upper limit of normal. The left anterior descending coronary artery showed up to 70 per cent occlusion by atheromatous plaque. The left circumflex and right coronary arteries each showed up to 50 per cent occlusion. Apart from some congenital abnormalities, the remaining findings were unremarkable. The pathologist expressed the view that death had been caused by acute left ventricular failure, which had been due to ischaemic heart disease. The coroner found that the death was attributable to natural causes.
The Expert Evidence
Dr France explained to the Inquiry that the range of tests performed for the coroner would have revealed only the presence of a high concentration, 2000 micrograms per litre or above, of morphine, whereas lower concentrations would have gone undetected. A significantly lower concentration than that which would have been detected by the tests could be fatal. Thus, it was evident that the fact that toxicological tests had been carried out at post-mortem examination did not exclude the possibility that morphine or diamorphine may have been administered to Mrs Mottram.
Professor Whitwell found that sections of heart, liver, kidney and lungs had been sent for histological examination at the time of the post-mortem examination and noted that Dr Yates had not commented upon the results.
Professor Whitwell observed that the lung sections showed established bronchopneumonic changes with the small bronchi containing numerous polymorphs, clumps of bacteria and foreign material. In a number of areas there was neutrophil polymorph infiltrate within adjacent alveoli together with bacteria. She considered that the appearances indicated early bronchopneumonia with evidence of inhalation of foreign material. This, in her view, was the major pathology related to the death. It was unlikely to have arisen secondary to ischaemic heart disease but is usually seen in individuals who are lying immobile or debilitated for some reason. She pointed out that in deaths due to heroin overdose this is a not uncommon finding. It indicates survival for several hours or so after administration of the drug.
Professor Whitwell agreed that Mrs Mottram had ischaemic heart disease and there was sufficient coronary artery disease to account for a sudden death. However, there were no acute changes to explain the immediate cause of death, such as bleeding from a ruptured blood vessel or an acute myocardial infarction. That would not mean that the death could not have had a cardiac cause.
Professor Whitwell said that it was impossible to make any sensible estimate of the time of death. Nothing could be inferred from the autolysed condition of the brain or from the presence of rigor mortis. In her view, death could have occurred at any time after Mrs Mottram was last seen alive and before she was found dead, although she thought Mrs Mottram must have been ill for some hours before death in order for the bronchopneumonic changes to have developed.
In Professor Whitwell's view, the most likely cause of death was bronchopneumonia. However, she concluded her report by saying:
'there is a significant possibility that the deceased was rendered comatose by administration of morphine/diamorphine, developing acute bronchopneumonia as a result'
.
In oral evidence, Professor Whitwell said that it was not possible to say what happened to Mrs Mottram from a consideration of the medical evidence. It is likely that for some reason she had suffered a reduction in consciousness and while in that state she had vomited and inhaled some vomit. That would lead to the development of the bronchopneumonia from which she probably died. There were several ways in which the reduction of consciousness could have come about. She could have ingested a drug which had reduced her level of consciousness; she might have had a stroke; she might have been given an injection of opiate but it would have had to be an intramuscular injection of a dose not sufficient to prove fatal within a short period.
One of the drugs mentioned in the toxicological report as having been available to Mrs Mottram is listed as
'chlordiazepine (possibly chlordiazepoxide)'
, prescribed for the management of short-term anxiety. There is no record of this drug having been prescribed for Mrs Mottram on any occasion. As it would appear that Shipman gave Mrs Mottram the two brown bottles without issuing a prescription, there seems to be a real possibility that the brown bottles contained chlordiazepine or chlordiazepoxide and that this drug was mentioned to the coroner's officer when she prepared a list of the drugs to which Mrs Mottram had access. It seems likely therefore that there was nothing sinister about the drug in the brown bottles. The fact remains that Shipman's conduct in leaving drugs for Mrs Mottram in this way was highly improper.
Conclusion
There is no reliable evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Mottram over the weekend of 20th
-21st
July. It is possible that he visited her but there is no reason to think that he did.
If Shipman had killed Mrs Mottram, it would have been courting a considerable risk for him to refer her death to the coroner with the suggestion that she might have committed suicide. Such a suggestion would mean that there was bound to be a post-mortem examination with toxicological tests. If a lethal quantity of opiate were to be found he might be able to pass it off as the result of a self-administered overdose, but he would have risked bringing suspicion on himself. If he had killed Mrs Mottram, it would be more usual for him to claim that he could certify a cause of death and, if necessary, to fabricate entries in the medical records which would support his diagnosis.
The only way in which I can imagine that Shipman could have killed Mrs Mottram would be by giving her an intramuscular injection of opiate of an amount which was not sufficient to kill her but was sufficient to reduce her level of consciousness for a substantial period. After the injection Mrs Mottram would have felt drowsy and might have lain on the floor with a cushion to make herself comfortable. She might then have vomited, inhaled the vomit and developed bronchopneumonia. To give a dose of opiate which was insufficient to kill would be atypical of Shipman, although he did do this by mistake, I think on one or two occasions. To give an intramuscular injection would always be risky, as the patient might be found and revived. Shipman was usually careful to ensure the death of any patient he decided to kill. By 1996 he had considerable experience of killing by injecting opiates and I think it unlikely he would have given an inadequate dose by mistake.
Taking these factors into account, it seems to me unlikely that Shipman played any part in Mrs Mottram's death. If, as I accept, the immediate cause of death was bronchopneumonia, it seems likely that the underlying cause was a cerebrovascular accident. Mrs Mottram had been diagnosed as suffering such an episode in the past and must therefore have been at risk of a further stroke at any time.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001