The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
John Bennett Molesdale
Introduction
Mr John Bennett Molesdale died at his home, 22 Old Road, Newton, Hyde on Thursday, 29th
December 1994 at the age of 81. He lived on his own and had never married. He had been a patient of Shipman since 1977 and had followed Shipman when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He thought highly of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Molesdale's death was old age.
During the course of the police investigation into the death of Miss Lena Slater, the investigating officers interviewed Mrs Doreen Brelsford, a friend of Mr Molesdale from church, who expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of Mr Molesdale's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Brelsford and Mrs Mary Wood, a friend and neighbour of Mr Molesdale.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Molesdale but an inquest into his death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has obtained an additional statement from Mrs Brelsford. The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Molesdale's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Molesdale had a number of distant relatives with whom he had had little, if any, contact prior to his death. It may be that he was remotely related to Mr Ralph Gee Cash, a friend through the church and the named informant on his death certificate.
Mr Molesdale was overweight for most of his life and, as a result, had limited mobility. In about 1992, he developed ulceration of the legs, which was a painful condition. A district nurse visited about three times a week to dress his leg ulcers. Mrs Wood used to clean the house for him, usually on a Tuesday, and Mrs Brelsford walked his dog every day. He could manage to cook his own meals. In March 1994, Mr Molesdale suffered a very slight stroke from which he apparently made a speedy and full recovery.
According to Mrs Brelsford, Mr Molesdale did not suffer from any serious medical conditions and he remained of sound mind until the time of his death. This is borne out by Mr Molesdale's Lloyd George folder containing his general practice records, which is remarkably slim for a man of his age. The records confirm the transient ischaemic attack in March 1994. Thereafter, the condition of his legs was monitored from time to time. There is no sign of any other condition.
According to Mrs Brelsford, Shipman visited Mr Molesdale about two months before he died. This was the last visit of which Mrs Brelsford was aware. Mr Molesdale was a private person, who did not discuss his health with others. The computerised records refer to a home visit on 3rd
October 1994, when a flu vaccine was administered. An entry in the Lloyd George notes for the same date records:
'leg ulcer OK
'
.
The Day of the Death
At some time during the morning of 29th
December 1994, Mrs Brelsford called at Mr Molesdale's house to collect his dog for his walk. During the morning she also did some shopping for Mr Molesdale and collected his pension. She returned to his house at about 11.30am and put his shopping, pension book and money on the kitchen table. Mr Molesdale was sitting in the kitchen at the back of the house. He seemed to Mrs Brelsford to be his usual self. She returned home and went out soon afterwards to take her brother-in-law to hospital for an appointment.
Mrs Wood returned home from a trip to Denton at about 2pm. She noticed that Mr Molesdale's front door was wide open, which was most unusual. He usually kept the door closed but unlocked. Mrs Wood went across to the house and into the lounge, where she found Mr Molesdale sitting in an armchair. He was wearing his normal day clothes and a cap. His legs were crossed and it appeared to her that he was dead. Mrs Wood returned home, spoke briefly to her husband and then went to Mrs Brelsford's house.
Mrs Brelsford recalls that Mrs Wood came to her house shortly after 3pm in an agitated state. The two women went together to see Mr Molesdale. Mrs Brelsford says that he was sitting upright in his chair with his head slightly inclined backwards and his mouth partially open. He was wearing the same clothes as he had been wearing when she had seen him earlier that day. It was obvious to her that he was dead.
Mrs Brelsford immediately telephoned Shipman's surgery and he came quite quickly. Mrs Brelsford recalls that Shipman looked at Mr Molesdale and, without touching him or making any examination, said, 'Oh yes, he is dead. Now we must look for a will'. Having searched unsuccessfully for a will, Shipman said that Mr Molesdale 'was all right when I saw him at 1.30'. Mrs Wood recalls events slightly differently. She remembers saying to Shipman, 'We don't know whether he's dead or not' and Shipman then touched Mr Molesdale's neck and said, 'Oh he's dead all right'. She states that Shipman said, 'I was here at dinner time. He was laid on the bed'.
Whatever the precise order of events, both Mrs Brelsford and Mrs Wood were surprised to hear that Shipman had seen Mr Molesdale earlier that day as both were unaware that Mr Molesdale was expecting a visit from his doctor. He had certainly not mentioned it to Mrs Brelsford when she had seen him. Mrs Brelsford comments that Mr Molesdale would not have called the doctor out himself. Whenever Mr Molesdale wanted the district nurse to visit him, he would ask her to make the arrangement. Mr Molesdale's name does not appear in the visits book for that day.
Whilst Shipman was still at the house, Mrs Wood suggested that a local firm of undertakers, S & T Bradbury, be contacted to remove the body. According to Mrs Brelsford, Shipman advised that they call Massey's, which they did.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). He gave the cause of death as old age, said that he had last seen Mr Molesdale alive on the day of his death and indicated that there would be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He recorded the time of death as:
'About 1400 hours'
. He said that he had attended Mr Molesdale during his last illness, and in answer to question 6(b), which required him to state for how long he had attended, he wrote:
'Being seen regularly for 2 years'
. Examination of the medical records shows that that is a lie. Mr Molesdale had been seen only rarely. It appears that Shipman did not answer question 7, which asked when he had last seen the deceased alive. In the handwriting of Dr J B Hinchliffe, the medical referee, that section has been completed with the words:
'29.12.94 (Routine) by surgery'
. Shipman must have given that information to Dr Hinchliffe or a member of her staff. In so far as the entry appears to suggest that the last consultation was not a visit by Shipman in Mr Molesdale's home, the information given is false. On Form B, Shipman stated that he saw the body about one hour after the death and carried out a complete external examination. He did not, according to Mrs Brelsford. Shipman said that the mode of death was syncope of only seconds' duration. That must have been pure assumption, unless he had been present at the time. In response to question 11 (as to whether the answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or the statements of others) Shipman wrote:
'Own. Found sat in chair in living room'
. He said that no one had nursed Mr Molesdale in his last illness and no one had been present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
There are two entries in the Lloyd George notes dated 29th
December 1994. The first reads:
'Routine visit
130/90 HS I II Resp
Ankles as before
doing well 3/12'
.
I interpret that to suggest that Shipman made a routine call. He found Mr Molesdale well. Blood pressure was 130/90, which is entirely satisfactory. Heart sounds and respiration were normal. The ankles were as before, presumably ulcerated. Shipman intended a review in three months' time. The second entry reads:
'1505 hrs certified dead
Old Age'
.
Dr Alan Banks examined the medical records in this case. In his view, the medical history does not support the stated cause of death, old age. He notes that there is nothing in the final entry in the Lloyd George notes to suggest that Mr Molesdale was likely to die imminently. He infers from Shipman's intention to review Mr Molesdale in three months' time that he must have expected him to live until then. Dr Banks said that a post-mortem examination was needed in this case to ascertain the cause of death.
Professor Richard Baker has considered Mr Molesdale's medical records and then separately the cremation certificate. He concluded that each invited a high degree of suspicion. He commented that Mr Molesdale was a
'relatively healthy 81 yr old,
(
with
)
no evidence of gradual decline'
. He observed that this death was suspicious as it occurred suddenly after a visit by Shipman. There was no preceding history to suggest that death was imminent.
Additional Matters
On the day following Mr Molesdale's death, Mrs Brelsford looked for the pension money that she had left on the kitchen table for Mr Molesdale. She could not find either it or his wallet.
Conclusion
There are several highly suspicious features surrounding this death.
The most suspicious feature is the temporal link between the death and the final visit from Shipman. Shipman visited at about lunchtime on the day of the death. Mrs Brelsford recalls him saying that his visit was at 1.30pm. Shipman certified the time of death to be 2pm, half an hour after his visit. The body was discovered less than an hour after his visit. No one saw Mr Molesdale alive or spoke to him after Shipman's visit.
Shipman did not visit Mr Molesdale to attend to a pressing medical concern. The visit had not been requested and is recorded in the Lloyd George notes as a
'Routine visit'
. Whilst an unsolicited visit by a doctor to an elderly patient would not normally give rise to suspicion, in Shipman's case it does, especially where the patient is found dead very soon afterwards. In this case, the death was wholly unexpected, as Mr Molesdale had no recent history of illness and was seen to be in normal health at about 11.30am on the day of his death.
That Mr Molesdale's condition might deteriorate so rapidly and that he should die, within half an hour of a routine visit, due to old age, is wholly implausible. In his generic evidence given to the Inquiry, Dr John Grenville explained that to certify a death as being due to old age:
'is an appropriate thing to put where an elderly patient has been suffering for some time with generalised degenerative disease involving several organs, the elderly patient has been ill for a significant period of time, usually weeks or months, with multiple organ failure and the death is fully expected. It may be difficult in those circumstances to determine exactly which organ it was that ultimately failed and brought about the death'
.
Old age is plainly inappropriate in a case where there has been no such general degenerative disease.
This death ought certainly to have been referred to the coroner. It was a sudden and unexpected death. Its cause was unknown. Old age was wholly inappropriate as a cause of death. There is no suggestion or indication that Mr Molesdale could have died from a sudden cardiac or cerebrovascular condition.
When Shipman returned to the house he did not examine Mr Molesdale before declaring that he was dead. He only touched his neck. In his generic evidence to the Inquiry, Dr Grenville described the steps that should be taken by a doctor to establish the fact of death. The first is to check for a pulse in the wrist and then the neck, for about 30 seconds in each location. Following this, he should observe the chest wall for respiratory movements, again for 30 seconds or more. Then he should listen to the chest with a stethoscope for both heart and respiratory sounds, again for a period of 30 seconds or longer. If those tests are negative, a torch should be shone into each eye to check the pupillary reaction and the interior of each eye should be examined with an ophthalmoscope. Finally, best practice would be to then apply a painful stimulus and to see whether this created a response. Of the six steps identified by Dr Grenville, Shipman partially carried out only one and in a perfunctory way. This point should not be overstated, as Shipman has been observed not to follow these steps in deaths that are clearly natural. However, Shipman could only have known with certainty that Mr Molesdale was dead if he had seen him die during his earlier visit. The inference is that, on the second visit, he well knew that Mr Molesdale was dead.
The lies and misleading statements made on Form B give rise to some suspicion. It appears to me that Shipman wished to create the impression that he saw Mr Molesdale regularly and to avoid giving the impression that he personally had seen the patient only a very short time before his death.
Mr Molesdale's appearance in death is entirely typical of the appearance of many of Shipman's victims who have been killed by the administration of a lethal injection of diamorphine.
Taking all these factors into account, I am driven to the conclusion that Mr Molesdale was killed by Shipman. I am sure of that conclusion. The overwhelming likelihood is that the death was caused by an injection of strong opiate, probably diamorphine. I cannot reach a positive conclusion that Shipman stole Mr Molesdale's wallet and pension but I strongly suspect that he did.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001