The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Selina Mackenzie
Introduction
Mrs Selina Mackenzie died at her home, 35 Perrin Street, Hyde on Tuesday, 17th
December 1985 at the age of 77. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of information contained in the cremation certificate, the death of Mrs Mackenzie was highly suspicious. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Mackenzie's daughter, Mrs Doris Jean Albison, who lives in Nottingham. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Albison and has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1985, the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation. The medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Mackenzie enjoyed good health for most of her life. When she was in her fifties, however, she was found to have high blood pressure. She also had angina, for which she was prescribed glyceryl trinitrate tablets. It is likely, therefore, that she had ischaemic heart disease.
In July 1984, Mrs Mackenzie's husband died after a long illness and his death had a profound effect on her. She could see no reason to go on living without him. Mrs Albison was their only child.
In August or September 1984, Mrs Mackenzie fell downstairs at home. She was taken to Tameside General Hospital where she was diagnosed as having suffered a mild stroke. She rested until Christmas 1984, by which time her condition had improved.
In May 1985, Mrs Albison took her mother for a week's holiday to Paignton, Devon. During the holiday, Mrs Mackenzie complained of feeling dizzy and suffered a number of falls. After the holiday, Mrs Albison spoke to Shipman over the telephone about her mother's health. Shipman said that Mrs Mackenzie had probably had some mini-strokes. He assured Mrs Albison that he would 'keep an eye' on her mother. He seemed to be as good as his word and kept Mrs Albison informed about her mother whenever he had seen her.
In September 1985, Mrs Mackenzie suffered another stroke and spent three months in Tameside General Hospital. Mrs Mackenzie's speech became very slurred and for a time she lost the use of all her limbs.
Mrs Mackenzie returned home from hospital on 6th
December 1985. By this time, she was mobile with the use of a frame. She could not care for herself but would not hear of the idea of going into residential care. At home, she needed a great deal of support and assistance from relatives, friends and Social Services. One carer would get her up in the morning. A home help would do the housework and shopping. Another carer would visit in the afternoon to make sandwiches and a flask of tea. At first, Mrs Mackenzie seemed rather depressed and said that she had had enough and wanted to be 'with her husband'. However, after a few days at home, she seemed more cheerful.
Mrs Albison spent the weekend of 14th
/15th
December at her mother's home in Hyde. They were making plans for Christmas and it had been agreed that Mrs Mackenzie would go to Mrs Albison's home in Nottingham. Mrs Albison spoke to Shipman about these plans on Saturday, 14th
December. He was very helpful and provided the telephone number of Social Services and advice about obtaining specialist equipment. He promised to call in on Mrs Mackenzie on the Tuesday, which would be 17th
December. Mrs Mackenzie's health did not appear to deteriorate over the weekend. She was looking forward to Christmas and had arranged to have her hair done before she went to Nottingham.
The Day of the Death
At about 5.30pm on Tuesday, 17th
December 1985, Mrs Albison telephoned her mother. Mrs Albison's aunt, Mrs Elsie Stafford, answered Mrs Mackenzie's telephone. Mrs Stafford said, 'I was going to ring you, I've got some bad news, mother's died'. Mrs Stafford told Mrs Albison that the afternoon carer had called to make her sandwiches and her flask of tea and had found Mrs Mackenzie sitting in her usual chair, apparently asleep. She did not respond when spoken to and the carer, realising that something was wrong, telephoned Mrs Stafford. Mrs Stafford and another of Mrs Albison's aunts, Mrs Beattie, who is now dead, went to the house and found Mrs Mackenzie dead. Shipman was summoned and arrived at about 3.45pm.
The following entry appears in Shipman's visits book for 17th
December 1985:
'McKenzie 35 Perrin St
'
.
Shipman used the sign of the cross to signify that the patient had died.
The Aftermath
Mrs Albison travelled to Hyde the following day. She went to see Shipman at the surgery. He told her that he had certified the cause of death as cerebrovascular accident and hypertension. He asked Mrs Albison if she was happy with that, to which Mrs Albison said that she was if that was in fact the cause. Shipman said that, if she was not happy, he could arrange for a post-mortem examination. He said that that would have the effect of delaying the funeral and suggested that she might not wish to 'go through that' so soon after her father's death. He suggested that she had been through a great deal recently and would wish to avoid the extra trouble of a post-mortem. Mrs Albison agreed that she did not want a post-mortem. At the time she thought that Shipman was being attentive to her feelings. He gave her some Valium to calm her nerves.
Later that day, Mrs Albison spoke to one of her mother's neighbours, Mrs Emma Gosling. Mrs Gosling said that she had spoken to Mrs Mackenzie on the morning of her death. Mrs Mackenzie had been looking forward to going to Nottingham. Mrs Mackenzie also mentioned that she had fallen and hurt her finger and that she would mention this to Shipman, who was coming to see her that afternoon. Mrs Gosling told Mrs Albison that she had been intending to call in on Mrs Mackenzie in the afternoon but that, at about 3pm, she saw Shipman going into Mrs Mackenzie's house. Later that afternoon, she saw Mrs Stafford and Mrs Beattie at Mrs Mackenzie's house, so she did not call round.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that Mrs Mackenzie had died at home on 17th
December. He said that he had last seen her alive on the day of her death. He said that he had seen the body after death. There would not be a post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that death had occurred at
'1600 hours'
on 17th
December 1985. In the introductory part of the form, he incorrectly recorded Mrs Mackenzie's address as 15, instead of 35, Perrin Street, Hyde. He said that he had attended Mrs Mackenzie for six months during her last illness. He stated that he had last seen her alive about an hour before her death and had seen the body 'about 15 minutes' after death. The cause of death was said to be cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension and the mode of death was said to be syncope. When asked to what extent his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements of others, Shipman wrote:
'Own. Seen at 1500 hours.
Found by relative About 1600 hours
sat slumped in chair'
.
Shipman said that District Nurse Clegg and a home help had nursed Mrs Mackenzie during her last illness. He said that no one was present at the moment of death.
Conclusion
There are several highly suspicious circumstances surrounding this death.
The first and most obvious is that Mrs Mackenzie was found dead very shortly after a visit by Shipman. No one spoke to her or saw her alive after his visit. That in itself excites great suspicion. It would be a very substantial coincidence if Mrs Mackenzie had died a natural death in the short period between Shipman's departure and the arrival of her afternoon carer. It appears that the time span was very short. Shipman was seen at the house by a neighbour at about 3pm and the carer arrived at about 3.45pm. Although these times cannot be relied on as accurate, they give an idea of the time span involved. If Shipman had found Mrs Mackenzie to be showing any signs of a stroke when he saw her at about 3pm, it would be mandatory for him to contact someone to ensure that she was not left alone. No competent doctor would leave an elderly patient alone in such circumstances.
Mrs Mackenzie had had at least two strokes in the past, as well as some so-called mini-strokes. I must and do assume that she was at considerable risk of having another stroke. Although it appears that her past strokes had been of the occlusive type (which do not usually cause sudden death but give rise to loss of speech and limb movement), it is possible that she could have had a sudden fatal brain stem stroke. However, the chances of that sudden stroke happening within the short period after Shipman's departure and the carer's arrival are minimal.
It is theoretically possible that Mrs Mackenzie could have died a sudden natural death from some cause other than a stroke. For example she could have had a heart attack. However, the chances of such a sudden fatal event occurring so shortly after Shipman's departure are also minimal.
Mrs Mackenzie's position and appearance were not typical of what is usually seen when a patient has had a sudden fatal stroke or heart attack. They were, however, entirely typical of those seen in many of Shipman's victims whom he had killed using a lethal injection of opiate.
I am quite satisfied that Shipman killed Mrs Mackenzie. Shipman's visit that day was never intended to be more than a routine check before she went away for Christmas. It seems to me quite clear that Shipman planned that visit as an opportunity to kill Mrs Mackenzie.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001