The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Deborah Middleton
Introduction
Mrs Deborah Middleton died at her home, 4 Manor Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 7th
January 1986 at the age of 81. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. She thought highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was cardiac failure.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of information contained in the cremation certificate, the death of Mrs Middleton was highly suspicious. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Middleton's daughter, Mrs Barbara Taylor, and from her granddaughter, Mrs Jacqueline Barbara Slaney. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Taylor and Mrs Slaney and also has had access to the visits books for the relevant period, the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation. The medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Middleton was widowed in 1960. In April 1980, she and her daughter began to live together and moved to 4 Manor Road. Mrs Taylor recalls that she did the cleaning and heavy shopping and her mother did all the cooking and light shopping. At that stage, Mrs Middleton had already undergone a double mastectomy, probably because of breast cancer. In 1982, she underwent stomach surgery at Withington Hospital. She had to look after herself in the winter months as she had a bad chest. When her chest was bad, Shipman would usually give her an antibiotic. In other respects she was well and remained active up to the time of her death.
Mrs Middleton used to look after her great-grandchildren each day after their return from school.
Mrs Slaney told the police that her grandmother had had a bad chest in the days before her death and had decided to consult Shipman. However, she has subsequently told the Inquiry that when she spoke to her grandmother on the day before her death, she appeared 'fine' and 'certainly did not seem to be unwell'.
Mrs Taylor recalls that her mother had a hospital appointment or appointments in the period leading up to her death and possibly also for the day of her death. These were routine and either in connection with her cataracts or with her feet, or both.
Mrs Middleton's name appears in Shipman's visits book for 23rd
December 1985. It may well be that this visit was requested because Mrs Middleton was suffering her customary winter chest problems.
Mrs Taylor makes no mention of chest problems in the days leading up to her mother's death, but she does recall that it was arranged for Shipman to visit Mrs Middleton at home on 7th
January because she was feeling tired.
The Day of the Death
On 7th January, Mrs Taylor went to work as usual. She thinks that her mother was well when she left the house, although she had said that she felt tired. Shipman was to visit that day.
At 3.15pm, Mrs Slaney collected her children from school. Her daughter, Rachel, said that she wanted to go to Brownies with her cousins Sharon and Kerry. Mrs Slaney expected that Sharon and Kerry would be at Manor Road with Mrs Middleton so she took her family to Manor Road on the bus. They arrived at about 4.15pm, to find Sharon and Kerry standing in the street because Mrs Middleton would not answer the door. Mrs Slaney looked through the living room window at the front of the house and saw her grandmother lying on her back across the sofa. She appeared to be sleeping.
Mrs Slaney found a neighbour, Mr Jones, who had a key to Mrs Middleton's house and she asked another neighbour, named Len, to come into the house with her as she feared that her grandmother might be dead. Mr Jones has since died and Len has since moved from Manor Road and his whereabouts are unknown.
On entering the house, Mrs Slaney went into the front room and immediately realised that her grandmother was dead. Her cheeks were sunken. There was a book on her chest. Mrs Slaney did not think this unusual because her grandmother would often read whilst lying on the settee when waiting for her great-grandchildren to return from school. She was also wearing her spectacles.
Mrs Slaney and her mother have some recollection that a note or prescription was found on the mantelpiece after the death was discovered. Their evidence is vague, which is not surprising given the time that has passed. As Shipman admitted that he had visited that afternoon, this evidence has no great significance.
Following the discovery of the body, the paramedics, the police, Mrs Taylor and Shipman all arrived at various times. Mrs Slaney cannot recall for how long Shipman was at the house or what he did whilst he was there. He said that no post-mortem examination was necessary. The table had been set in readiness for the children's return from school and two gas rings had been lit in the kitchen. It was Mrs Middleton's practice to light the two front gas rings to warm the kitchen about an hour before the children arrived home. No one mentioned that Shipman had been seen visiting earlier that day.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that he had last seen Mrs Middleton alive on the day of her death. He said that the cause of her death was cardiac failure. Old age had contributed to the death. He said that he had seen the body after death and there would be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He said that Mrs Middleton had died at about 5pm, which is plainly wrong and inconsistent with other information supplied on Form B. This time is written immediately above a deleted entry, which is illegible. Shipman recorded that he had been Mrs Middleton's ordinary medical attendant for a period of eight years and that he had attended her during her last illness for a period of three months. He stated that he had last seen her alive two hours before her death, which on his timings would be at about 3pm, although he originally wrote three hours, which would be at about 2pm. He said that he had seen the body about one hour after the death and made a complete external examination of it. He recorded the causes of death as on the MCCD counterfoil. Old age was not an appropriate cause of death or even a contributory cause, as Mrs Middleton was still an active woman. Shipman recorded that the mode of death was syncope lasting minutes. When asked to what extent his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others, Shipman wrote:
'Seen at 1400 hrs 7.1.86
found by granddaughter 14.20
(
although it appears he first wrote 15.30
)
on settee - Ambulance arrived
found her dead 1500 hrs'
.
Shipman also claimed that Mrs Middleton's granddaughter was present at the moment of death, which was quite untrue.
Conclusion
There are a number of highly suspicious circumstances surrounding this death.
It is possible that Mrs Middleton was suffering from a chest infection on 7th
January and also that she felt very tired. Extreme tiredness could be a symptom of heart failure; however, I do not think her symptoms could have been very serious that morning. Had they been, her daughter would not have gone to work, leaving her alone. Had Mrs Middleton felt ill during the day, I think it likely that she would have telephoned either her daughter or granddaughter. As it was, it appears that she went about her usual daily duties, which included making preparations for the arrival of her great-grandchildren after school. There is no evidence to suggest that Mrs Middleton had anything seriously wrong with her in the early afternoon when those preparations would have been made.
On Form B, Shipman admitted that he had seen Mrs Middleton on the afternoon of her death. No one saw her or spoke to her after his visit. That in itself is a highly suspicious feature. For a woman who was not apparently ill to die suddenly at about the time of Shipman's visit would be a real coincidence.
The timings provided by Shipman on Form B are hopelessly inconsistent. Shipman said that death had occurred at 5pm, having crossed out his first entry. Shipman claimed to have seen Mrs Middleton alive two hours before her death, again having overwritten his first attempt. He went on to say that Mrs Middleton was found at
'14.20'
by her granddaughter, 40 minutes before he admitted last having seen her alive, and that she was dead by 3pm when the ambulance crew arrived. At the very least, this inconsistency shows extreme carelessness by Shipman. When I see signs of Shipman making alterations to the timings on Form B, I suspect that he has been trying to work out how best to distance his own visit from the time of the death. Here he seeks to put about two hours between his visit and the time of death. However, the witness evidence suggests that the time of death was well before 5pm, as Shipman first suggested on Form B. Mrs Slaney says that she found Mrs Middleton dead at about 4.30pm and she would have no way of knowing how long Mrs Middleton had been lying dead. What Shipman was thinking of when he said later on Form B that the time of death was 3pm I cannot say. It appears to me that he was either confused or simply very careless.
There is an obvious lie on Form B, where Shipman alleged that Mrs Slaney was present at the moment of death. I am satisfied that she was not. In my view, Shipman told that lie in order to dispel the idea that he might have been present and to create the impression that a member of the family was there, as would be usual if Mrs Middleton's death had been expected.
Mrs Middleton's appearance in death was wholly inconsistent with death due to cardiac failure but was wholly consistent with the appearance of many of Shipman's victims who had died by lethal injection of diamorphine.
My conclusion is that Shipman must have killed Mrs Middleton, almost certainly by lethal injection of diamorphine. Notwithstanding the absence of the medical records, I feel sure of this conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001