The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Samuel Mellor
Introduction
Mr Samuel Mellor died at his home, 27 Sidley Place, Hyde on Wednesday, 15th
November 1989 at the age of 73. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. He thought highly of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was coronary thrombosis due to chronic obstructive airways disease due to emphysema.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that he regarded the death as moderately suspicious on account of the contents of both the medical records and the cremation documentation. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mr Mellor's daughter, Mrs Shirley Barnes. Mrs Barnes told the police that she was not concerned about Shipman's role in her father's death.
An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Barnes and has had access to Mr Mellor's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following examination of the documents and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Dr Grenville, who has reviewed Mr Mellor's medical records, says that Mr Mellor suffered from very severe chronic obstructive airways disease (COAD). He developed cor pulmonale, or right-sided heart failure. It appears that shortly after celebrating his golden wedding anniversary in December 1988, he deteriorated to such an extent that he was confined to bed. From about May 1989, Mr Mellor required an oxygen mask to assist his breathing. A chest x-ray, taken in August 1989, revealed pulmonary venous congestion. The appearance of the heart and lungs were suggestive of left ventricular failure. By that time, Mr Mellor was constantly dependent on his oxygen mask and the prognosis was poor. However, there is no suggestion that he was in pain.
The Day of the Death
On the evening of 14th
November 1989, Mrs Barnes received a telephone call from her mother, informing her that her father was very ill. She went to her parents' house to find that Shipman was already there. It was immediately apparent to her that her father was in a serious condition. Mrs Barnes does not say that her father was in pain. She says that his throat was making a 'gargling' sound as he struggled to breathe. Shipman explained that this was because his lungs had collapsed. He also said that it was now time to disconnect Mr Mellor's supply of oxygen and 'let him go'. Mrs Barnes and her mother agreed that the oxygen should be stopped. Mrs Barnes left the room and believes that the oxygen mask was then removed either by Shipman or by her mother. Mrs Barnes does not say that Shipman administered any medication to her father during that visit.
Mrs Barnes told the Inquiry that her father died at about 1am the next day, Wednesday, 15th
November 1989. Shipman was called and pronounced life extinct. Before leaving earlier, he had said that when Mr Mellor died, he should be called, no matter what time of day or night.
There is no medical record relating to Shipman's visit on 14th
November, at which the oxygen supply was stopped, nor any relating to the death itself.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been recovered. Shipman certified that the death was due to coronary thrombosis, which was due to chronic obstructive airways disease due to emphysema. Shipman said that he had seen Mr Mellor on the day before his death and had seen the body after death. He said there would be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He stated that death had occurred at
'Approx 0115hrs'
on 15th November 1989. He said that he had attended Mr Mellor for 24 hours during his last illness. He said that he had last seen him alive six to seven hours before his death and had seen his body 15 to 20 minutes after death. The causes of death were as stated on the MCCD. Shipman stated that the mode of death was a coma of 6 to 12 hours' duration. He said that Mr Mellor's wife and other relatives were present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville told the Inquiry that, until shortly before his death, Shipman's treatment of Mr Mellor's severe chronic obstructive airways disease had been appropriate.
Dr Grenville is critical of Shipman's decision to remove Mr Mellor's supply of oxygen. The purpose of the oxygen supply was to make him more comfortable and its removal might well have made him more distressed in the final stages of his illness, especially if he were still conscious. However, Dr Grenville noted that Shipman claimed that Mr Mellor had been in a coma for 6 to 12 hours at the time of his death, so it seems likely that he was unconscious or nearly so when the oxygen supply was terminated. In Dr Grenville's view, the cessation of oxygen did not significantly hasten the death, despite Shipman's reported comment 'It's time to let him go'.
Conclusion
There is clear independent evidence that Mr Mellor suffered severe long-standing chronic obstructive airways disease. It appears that he deteriorated gradually towards death. His death was not sudden or unexpected.
There is no evidence that Shipman administered an injection to Mr Mellor in the hours leading up to his death.
Shipman's only questionable action is that he advised that the oxygen supply should be removed. Dr Grenville says that this did not significantly hasten the death. It has been submitted on behalf of the family that, notwithstanding the opinion of Dr Grenville, Mr Mellor was unlawfully killed by Shipman.
I cannot accept the submission that Shipman unlawfully killed Mr Mellor by terminating the oxygen supply. In order to reach a conclusion that Shipman unlawfully caused a death, there are two essential findings: first, that there was an unlawful act and, second, that that unlawful act caused (or materially contributed to) the death. Even if the act of removing the oxygen supply were unlawful, which is doubtful, I cannot find that Shipman's action caused or materially contributed to the death. The only evidence on this issue comes from Dr Grenville. He says that Shipman's decision to remove the oxygen supply did not cause Mr Mellor's death. On behalf of the family, it is submitted that the removal of the supply 'inevitably contributed' to the death. In the face of Dr Grenville's evidence that the removal of the supply did not cause the death, I cannot infer that it must have done. In those circumstances, the only possible conclusion open to me is that this was not an unlawful killing.
It would be sterile to debate the issue of whether Shipman's action in removing the oxygen mask was unlawful. Dr Grenville says that it was inappropriate because the oxygen supply made Mr Mellor comfortable. That, of course, I accept and I can understand that this evidence might have caused some distress to the family. However, not all inappropriate actions are unlawful. There is no evidence that Shipman's action was obviously dangerous or that it was intended to harm the patient.
My conclusion is that I am quite satisfied that Mr Mellor died a natural death. The grounds for Professor Baker's suspicions have been addressed by the further evidence available to the Inquiry, which was not available to him.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001