The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Middleton
Introduction
Mrs Mary Middleton died at her home, 25 Baron Road, Gee Cross, Hyde on Thursday, 2nd
May or Friday, 3rd
May 1991. Her body was discovered on 3rd
May and the death was registered as having occurred on that day. She was aged 81. She had probably been a patient of Shipman since he arrived in Hyde in 1977 and she thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the available medical records and the cremation documentation, the death of Mrs Middleton was highly suspicious. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Middleton's son, Mr Thomas Ian Middleton. Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Middleton but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mr Middleton and has had access to Mrs Middleton's general practitioner records, Shipman's visits books for the relevant period, the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Middleton was widowed in 1978 and was living alone at the time of her death. Until that time, she had enjoyed reasonably good health. In 1979, she developed cancer in her right breast. She underwent a mastectomy and seemed to make a good recovery. In May 1985, she was diagnosed with a carcinoma of the left colon, for which she underwent a hemicolectomy. Again, she seemed to make a good recovery but, in November 1986, was diagnosed with an adenocarcinoma of the rectum. Following an abdominal perineal resection, with colostomy, she again made a good recovery.
Mr Middleton recalls that, in May 1988, his mother went to Devon for a family wedding. When he collected her from the coach station in Manchester, he noticed that one side of her face had dropped and that she was unsteady on her feet. He thought that she had had a stroke and took her home and put her to bed. The following day, he went to see her and telephoned Shipman's surgery. He did not speak to Shipman but left a message with the receptionist to say that he thought his mother had had a stroke. As far as Mr Middleton knows, his mother recovered well and suffered no major lasting effects. There is no reference to this episode in the medical records. Nor does Mrs Middleton's name appear in Shipman's visits book for May 1988.
It is possible that Mr Middleton has made a mistake about the date of this occurrence. There is an entry in the Lloyd George cards, which appears to be dated 21st
November 1989 and suggests that Shipman referred Mrs Middleton to the consultant physician, Dr M A Matin:
'Ref Dr Matin
(
illegible
)
(L)
small CVA? cerebral anoxia
By Hand 22.11.89
'
.
In 1989, the Donneybrook Surgery installed a computer. After the above record dated 21st
November, it appears that the Lloyd George cards were not further used for Mrs Middleton and her records were kept only on the computer.
Dr Matin saw Mrs Middleton at Tameside General Hospital in April 1990 and recorded a two to three month history of dizziness and unsteadiness. On examination, he heard a harsh aortic systolic murmur and he diagnosed aortic stenosis with peripheral vascular disease. There is a brief reference to this on the computer printout. The next entry notes a normal blood test followed by a chest x-ray which showed a prominence of the left ventricle.
In July 1990, Mrs Middleton had cramp in her legs. In February 1991, she was reviewed in connection with her rectum and was found to be
'OK'
. The records suggest that, in April 1991, Mrs Middleton injured her shoulder and the district nurse provided a figure of eight bandage. I can see no record of Mrs Middleton's blood pressure in the Lloyd George cards or in the computerised records and nothing to suggest that she was being treated for hypertension. The prescriptions record comprises mainly supplies for use in connection with her colostomy. I can see nothing which might suggest that Mrs Middleton was suffering from any illness in the weeks before her death.
Mr Middleton last saw his mother alive on Sunday, 28th
April 1991. He told the police that she seemed 'fine'. He last spoke to his mother over the telephone about three days before her death. She sounded a little weary and said she felt tired but she seemed to Mr Middleton to be generally 'all right'.
An entry in Shipman's visits book suggests that he visited Mrs Middleton at home on Monday, 29th
April.
The Day of the Death
At about 9.30am to 10am on Friday, 3rd
May 1991, Mr Middleton was at work when he received a message to say that the curate at his mother's church was concerned because the curtains to her house were still closed at 9am. She would normally open the curtains by 7.30am. Mr Middleton went straight to his mother's house and let himself in. He found her collapsed on the kitchen floor. He could not find a pulse and it was obvious that Mrs Middleton had died. Her body felt cold. She was dressed in her nightclothes and there was a tray on the kitchen worktop, upon which there was a milky drink which Mrs Middleton had not consumed. Mr Middleton says that it was his mother's usual habit to have a warm milky drink before she went to bed. Mr Middleton telephoned the surgery and the police.
Shipman attended within the hour and said that Mrs Middleton had died from a stroke. He told Mr Middleton that he could collect the death certificate from the surgery the following day. Shipman did not make any note of the death on the computer record.
According to the duty doctor transfer book, Shipman was not on duty on the evening of 30th
April, 1st
or 2nd
May.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. Shipman said that Mrs Middleton had died on 3rd
May 1991 and that he had last seen her alive on 21st
April. He said that he had seen the body after death. There would not be a post-mortem examination. The cause of death was a cerebrovascular accident and carcinomas of the breast and rectum had contributed to the death.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He stated that the death had occurred
'at 2200 hours'
on 2nd
May 1991. He said that he had attended Mrs Middleton for four weeks during her last illness. As I have said, there is nothing in Mrs Middleton's records to suggest that she had any illness at all in the last four weeks of her life. Shipman wrote that he had last seen Mrs Middleton alive 12 days before her death, which is consistent with what he wrote on the MCCD counterfoil. However, Mrs Middleton's name does not appear in the visits book for 21st
April or any of the surrounding days. It is possible that Shipman saw her in the surgery on one of those days but if he did, he did not make a note in the medical records. I think it unlikely that he had seen her then. It seems surprising that Shipman did not say that he had last seen Mrs Middleton alive on 29th
April, when the visits book suggests that he saw her. If he did see her on this date, I cannot tell why, as there is no entry in the records. On Form B, Shipman said that he examined the body 12 hours after death. The cause of death was stated as on the MCCD counterfoil. The mode of death was said to be collapse lasting only seconds. That could only have been surmise, as he stated that no one was present at the death. He said that his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and wrote:
'found by son collapsed and dead From body temp etc death 12 hours previous'
.
The Expert Evidence
Upon his consideration of both the medical records and the cremation documentation, Professor Baker assessed the level of suspicion in this case to be high.
Conclusion
Mrs Middleton's health had deteriorated following the death of her husband in 1978. Although it does not appear that she consulted Shipman very frequently, the records suggest that she was probably at increased risk of sudden death either from a heart attack or a stroke.
The circumstances in which Mrs Middleton was found strongly suggest that she collapsed and died while preparing for bed in the evening of 2nd
May. She was in her nightclothes and had made her bedtime drink. It is possible, but very unlikely, that she was visited by Shipman at that time. He was not on out of hours duty. Her collapse on the kitchen floor is suggestive of a sudden natural death, from either a heart attack or stroke.
The Inquiry has made extensive efforts to ascertain whether there is any evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Middleton on 2nd
May 1991. These enquiries have proved negative. Thus, there is no evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Middleton shortly before her death.
Some of Shipman's entries on the MCCD counterfoil and Form B appear to be inaccurate and probably dishonest. These factors would usually give rise to suspicion that he had something to hide and was seeking to create a plausible explanation for a death which he himself had caused. In particular, there seems to be no evidence to suggest a final illness of four weeks' duration. The date on which Shipman last saw Mrs Middleton alive was more likely to have been 29th
April than 21st
April although the incorrect entries seem more likely to have been the result of carelessness than deceit. I think Shipman's estimate of the time of death was probably reasonable but owes more to common sense inference from the domestic circumstances of the death than any scientific deduction from the body temperature. I do not think Shipman could possibly have been in a position to certify the cause of death with an appropriate degree of certainty. In my view, this death should certainly have been referred to the coroner.
I can understand why Professor Baker regarded the death as highly suspicious. There are flaws on Form B and the medical records do not adequately support the cause of death. However, Professor Baker was not aware of the circumstances in which Mrs Middleton's body was found. Those circumstances, witnessed by her son, persuade me that this was probably a natural death. I cannot say that I am certain that the death was natural. It is possible that Shipman might have visited Mrs Middleton and killed her but this seems extremely unlikely.
My conclusion is that this was very probably a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001