The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Ann Mansfield
Introduction
Mrs Mary Ann Mansfield died at her home, The Hare and Hounds Hotel, Werneth Low Road, Hyde on Monday, 23rd
June 1980 at the age of 84. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was respiratory failure due to chronic bronchitis.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of information contained on the cremation certificate, the death of Mrs Mansfield was moderately suspicious. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Elizabeth Oldham, Mrs Mansfield's daughter. At the time of her mother's death, her married name was Sutcliffe. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Oldham and has had access to the visits book for the relevant period, the cremation certificate and the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Mrs Mansfield's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Until their retirement, Mrs Mansfield and her husband ran the Hare and Hounds Hotel, in Hyde and they continued to live there after they had retired. According to Mrs Oldham, her mother had enjoyed quite good health and never suffered from any major health problems. She continued to work in the public house when she was in her seventies. When she reached her eighties, however, her health began to deteriorate and she developed bronchitis.
Mrs Oldham recalls that, in May 1980, Shipman prescribed her mother medication for a heart condition and tablets for 'water retention'.
On Sunday, 22nd
June 1980, Mrs Oldham was at her parents' home and noticed that her mother looked unwell. Her cheeks were swollen and she looked bloated. Her chest was also wheezy. By coincidence, Dr John Smith from the Donneybrook practice was in the public house that evening and Mrs Oldham asked him to examine her mother. Dr Smith asked about Mrs Mansfield's medication. Mrs Oldham showed him some small white tablets, which Mrs Oldham thought had been prescribed for water retention. Dr Smith said that they were not water tablets but antibiotics. Mrs Oldham subsequently discovered that a lady who worked in the public house had given her mother the tablets. Dr Smith asked Mrs Oldham to see Shipman the following morning and said that Shipman would prescribe some diuretic tablets for Mrs Mansfield.
The Day of the Death
On Dr Smith's advice, Mrs Oldham visited Shipman on the morning of 23rd
June. He prescribed diuretic tablets and said 'She should get rid of a bucketful with these'.
Mrs Oldham returned to see her mother and gave her the tablets. Mrs Mansfield did not seem any better after taking them. She remained sitting in a chair in the living room and kept falling asleep. She did not, however, complain of any pain. Mrs Oldham stayed with her mother until about 3pm or 4pm. She has told the Inquiry that, as far as she is aware, Shipman did not visit her mother that day. However, Shipman's visits book indicates that he intended to see Mrs Mansfield on 23rd
June. Moreover, after her death he completed the MCCD and counterfoil, on which he claimed that he did see her on that day.
Mrs Oldham thinks that her sister, Mrs Nora Nuttall, visited their mother at about 7pm. She recalls that her sister telephoned her at about 8pm to say that her mother had taken a turn for the worse. Mrs Oldham thinks that her mother was still conscious at that stage.
Mrs Oldham arrived at her parents' home at about 8.10pm and immediately noticed that her mother's breathing had become markedly worse. She also appeared to be semi-conscious. Mrs Oldham telephoned to ask for a doctor to visit but, before a doctor arrived, Mrs Mansfield died. Mrs Oldham thinks that this was at about 8.30pm.
The emergency doctor arrived about ten minutes later. He examined Mrs Mansfield and confirmed that she was dead.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD counterfoil on 24th
June 1980. He recorded that the cause of death was respiratory failure due to chronic bronchitis and that ischaemic heart disease had contributed to the death. He said that he had last seen Mrs Mansfield alive on 23rd
June 1980, which was the day of her death. He said that there was to be no post-mortem examination and that he had seen the body after death.
Shipman completed Form B and said that death had occurred at 9.45pm on 23rd
April 1980. This is obviously a mistake as the death occurred in June. Shipman stated that he had attended Mrs Mansfield during her last illness for a period of
'12 months
'
. He said that he last saw Mrs Mansfield alive nine hours before her death, which would have been at about midday. Mrs Oldham has told the Inquiry that, although she saw Shipman at his surgery on the morning of her mother's death, her mother did not go with her. Shipman did, however, write a prescription for Mrs Mansfield that morning. Shipman stated that he made a complete external examination of the body within 24 hours of death. He itemised the causes of death as on the MCCD counterfoil and said that the mode of death was a coma of three hours' duration. He said that his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on statements made by
'daughter, Mrs Sutcliffe Husband Mr Mansfield'
. Mrs Oldham says that she did not speak to Shipman after the death but that her father might have done. Shipman stated that Mrs Sutcliffe and Mr Mansfield were present at the death. Mrs Oldham has told the Inquiry that, although she was present at the death together with her sister, Mrs Nuttall, her father was not there.
Conclusion
Mrs Mansfield was clearly unwell the evening before she died. From the description given by Mrs Oldham, it sounds as though she was suffering from congestive heart failure. It appears that Dr Smith thought she was in need of a diuretic. It would appear that Mrs Mansfield might not have been taking the tablets which Shipman had prescribed and might have been taking an antibiotic given to her by a friend. It is entirely possible that Mrs Mansfield's health deteriorated and that she died a natural death during the evening of 23rd
June.
There are, however, other possibilities. The events of 23rd
June are something of a mystery. Mrs Oldham says that Shipman prescribed tablets for her mother without seeing her, which seems strange and inappropriate, particularly as Mrs Mansfield was reported to be rather more unwell than usual. Yet Shipman's visits book suggests that he did visit Mrs Mansfield, or at least intended to. On the MCCD counterfoil, he claimed that he had visited her that day. It is possible that Shipman visited Mrs Mansfield while neither Mrs Oldham nor her sister Mrs Nuttall was present. Mr Mansfield was alone with his wife between about 3pm and 7pm. Mrs Nuttall arrived at about 7pm. Even if Shipman did visit that afternoon or early evening, I am satisfied that he cannot have given Mrs Mansfield a lethal injection of opiate. If he visited that day, it must have been before 7pm. If he had given a lethal injection, Mrs Mansfield would not have lived until 8.30pm. A lethal injection of opiate can thus be ruled out.
There is a further possibility, which is that Shipman prescribed an inappropriate drug in the morning or gave inappropriate medication in the afternoon when he visited, if he did. I have come across one or two cases where I have suspected that Shipman gave either an opiate or some other form of sedative to a patient whose respiratory function was already severely compromised. Such a drug would cause further depression of respiratory function and might well hasten death. Only a small dose of such a drug would be needed to produce that effect. There are occasions when a doctor might properly give such a drug to a patient who is in pain or distress, but the consequences of so doing should usually be discussed with relatives first.
It will never be possible to discover what drugs Mrs Mansfield was given on the day of her death. If follows that I am unable to reach a positive conclusion about the cause of her death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001