The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Wilbert Mitchell
Introduction
Mr Wilbert Mitchell died at his home, Pasture Side Farm, Walsden, Todmorden on Tuesday, 1st
April 1975 at the age of 87. He was registered as a patient with Dr Brenda Lewin, a partner of Shipman at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Practice, Todmorden. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Mitchell's death was heart failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
Mr Mitchell's death was one of the 22 deaths for which the cause was certified by Shipman during his time in Todmorden. Following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's clinical audit in January 2001, the police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Mitchell's daughter and son-in-law, Mrs Clarice Knowles and Mr Tom Knowles.
No inquest was held at the time of the death but an inquest into Mr Mitchell's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mr and Mrs Knowles. Mr Mitchell's medical records have not survived and, apart from the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), there are no relevant contemporaneous documents.
Personal Background
Mr Mitchell had lived at Pasture Side Farm for about 30 years. At the time of his death, he was living with Mr and Mrs Knowles and their daughter. Mr Mitchell's wife had died some years earlier.
Mr Mitchell's daughter and son-in-law both say that Mr Mitchell was in good health for his age. He suffered from angina for which he took medication. Despite that, he remained mobile and active, and would still ride into Walsden as a pillion passenger on his son-in-law's motorcycle.
Dr Lewin used to visit Mr Mitchell monthly and would give him a repeat prescription for angina tablets. In her police statement, Mrs Knowles said that Dr Lewin had last visited her father on Thursday, 29th
March 1975. In fact 29th
March was a Saturday. In her police statement, she said that the day of Mr Mitchell's death, 1st
April 1975, was a Saturday. It was in fact a Tuesday. Mrs Mitchell seems to be confused about the dates. In his statement to the Inquiry, Mr Knowles said that Dr Lewin last visited his father-in-law on the Thursday before he died. That seems likely to be right and that would have been on Thursday, 27th
March 1975.
Mrs Knowles last saw her father alive during the evening of Monday, 31st
March. At that time he was well.
The Day of the Death
On 1st
April 1975, Mr and Mrs Knowles took their daughter to a horse show in Halifax. When they left, between 8am and 9am, Mr Mitchell was still in bed. Mrs Knowles made her father some sandwiches for his lunch and laid the fire in the living room, ready for him to light when he got up.
The family returned from Halifax at dusk. As they approached the farm, Mr Knowles noticed that the lights were not on. This was unusual, as Mr Mitchell would normally have the lights on, even during the day. Mrs Knowles went into the house and found her father, sitting upright in an armchair in the living room. She could see immediately that he was dead. His mouth was open and he looked very peaceful. Mrs Knowles says that there was no sign that he had been doing anything at the time of his death. He did not appear to have suffered any pain. Mr Knowles adds that Mr Mitchell wore glasses for reading but, to the best of his recollection, his father-in-law was not wearing glasses when he was found. Mr Mitchell was fully dressed. He had eaten the sandwiches that his daughter had made. Therefore, it appears likely that he died in the afternoon. The fire had burned out and, in Mr Knowles' opinion, had been out for between one and two hours.
Mr Knowles telephoned the Abraham Ormerod Medical Practice and left a message, asking the duty doctor to call round. Shipman arrived very soon afterwards. Mr Knowles says that he had never seen him before. He now recalls that Shipman's initial manner was quite offensive. Although he cannot recall precisely what was said, he feels that Shipman was accusing him of being in some way responsible for Mr Mitchell's death. The conversation became heated and Mr Knowles recalls Shipman shouting at him, 'When did he last see a doctor?' Mr Knowles told him that Dr Lewin had visited on the previous Thursday afternoon. On hearing this news, Shipman's attitude changed instantly, so suddenly that Mr Knowles likens the change to the flicking of a switch. Mr Knowles does not recall whether Shipman examined Mr Mitchell.
According to Dr John Grieve and Dr John Dacre, who were partners at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre, Dr Lewin, with whom Mr Mitchell was registered, would not carry out 'out of hours' visits. She suffered poor health for some years before her retirement. She would, however, carry out visits within normal surgery hours, illustrated by the fact that she visited Mr Mitchell at home a few days before his death. According to Dr Dacre, the usual practice was that, if an emergency visit were requested out of hours, where possible, the doctor requested by the patient would attend. If that were not possible, another doctor would visit.
Certification
The death certificate shows that it was Shipman who certified the cause of Mr Mitchell's death. He said it was due to heart failure which had been caused by ischaemic heart disease. Neither the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) nor its counterfoil has survived. On the MCCD, Shipman would have been required to say when he had last seen Mr Mitchell alive. If he had never seen him alive, strictly speaking he ought not to have certified the cause of death. As Dr Lewin had seen Mr Mitchell the previous week, she might have felt able to certify the cause of death. If she had felt unable to do so, the death should have been referred to the coroner.
Shipman certified the cause of this death. It is possible that he had seen Mr Mitchell alive, before the day of his death, although the family does not think he had. It is possible that Shipman had seen Mr Mitchell on the day of his death. It is also possible that Shipman was prepared to sign the MCCD although he had not seen Mr Mitchell alive. From other cases I have examined, I suspect that it was Shipman's practice to certify the cause of death of a patient even if he had never seen the patient alive. This would not be dishonest or sinister provided that he stated on the form that he had not seen the patient during life, and made it clear that he was relying on the word of the partner who had attended the patient. If the registrar were not satisfied, the death would be referred to the coroner. On the other hand, it is possible that Shipman claimed that he had seen the deceased alive when he had not done so. In the absence of the medical records, the MCCD and the surgery records, I cannot say what the position was.
I have wondered whether the hostile conversation which Mr Knowles recalls was related to Shipman's impression that Mr Mitchell had not seen a doctor for a long time, which would have meant that the death would have to be referred to the coroner. Why that should have made Shipman irritated, I do not know. It is possible that he was mollified by the realisation that Dr Lewin had seen the patient recently and it would be possible to complete the MCCD.
Mr Mitchell was buried, so there are no cremation documents.
Conclusion
As Mr Mitchell's medical records have not been recovered, little is known about his state of health except that he suffered from angina. Although he was clearly active until his death, Mr Mitchell must have been at an increased risk of sudden death from heart failure or heart attack. He was also at an increased risk due to his advanced age. However, he was well on the day before his death and seems, on the day of his death, to have been able to get up, dress himself, make and eat breakfast, and eat the lunch left for him. A sudden death was unexpected but not improbable.
It seems unlikely that Mr Mitchell would have called a doctor out that day except in a real emergency. It is possible that he felt very ill, possibly due to chest pain, and telephoned the surgery. As this was Easter Tuesday, one would expect the doctors to be back at work and dealing with their own patients. If so, one would expect that Dr Lewin would have visited her own patient. However, it is possible that some doctors were taking an extra day's holiday and that Shipman was on duty. It is possible that he went out to Mr Mitchell during the afternoon. He seems to have been on duty later that day, although the call after discovery of the death was probably made after normal surgery hours. If Shipman had been to the farm earlier in the day, he seems to have concealed that fact from the family, which would be a cause for suspicion. I think his hostile conversation with Mr Knowles suggests that Shipman had not seen Mr Mitchell that day and had in fact never seen him. What Shipman put on the MCCD, I do not know. It is quite possible that he spoke to Dr Lewin and agreed with her what should be put. He was relatively new to the practice and I think it unlikely that he would have signed the MCCD for one of Dr Lewin's patients without speaking to her about it. However, I cannot absolutely rule out the possibility that he did see Mr Mitchell that afternoon, concealed that fact from the family, and completed the MCCD, indicating when he had seen Mr Mitchell alive.
There is another slightly suspicious feature about the death. Mr Mitchell was found sitting in his chair looking very peaceful. Although he did not appear to be asleep, he did not, according to Mr Knowles' recollection, appear to have been in pain or distress. Dr John Grenville says that patients who die of acute left ventricular failure die a distressing death and are usually found with lung secretions on the face. Of course, Mr Mitchell might have had such secretions and the family has forgotten.
Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Mitchell's death was heart failure. In his first generic report to the Inquiry, Dr Grenville uses the phrases 'ventricular failure' and 'heart failure' interchangeably. According to Dr Grenville, heart failure may be acute or chronic. If the family's recollection is right, it would seem that Mr Mitchell did not have chronic heart failure. Acute left ventricular failure is associated with myocardial infarction. Mr Mitchell suffered from angina, which is a sign of ischaemic heart disease. One can therefore postulate a correlation between the history of angina and the stated cause of death. However, if Dr Lewin had found Mr Mitchell in his usual health the previous Thursday, as the family seems to think she did, I would have thought that this death ought probably to have been referred to the coroner.
There are some slightly puzzling features about this death and I unfortunately find myself in the position where I can reach no positive conclusion about it.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001