The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Maud Matley
Introduction
Mrs Maud Matley died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Wednesday, 8th
August 1979 at the age of 88. She had been a patient of Shipman since the end of September 1978, when she had moved to Charnley House. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was congestive heart failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
In January 2001, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions for murder, members of Mrs Matley's family expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her death. The police investigated the death, although no witness statements were taken. There has been no inquest into the death.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Joan Wilson (Mrs Matley's daughter), Ms Sylvia Kilgariff (a former carer at Charnley House) and Mrs Lillian Stansfield (the former matron and manager at Charnley House). The Inquiry has also had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, the Charnley House daily diary and Shipman's visits book for 1979. Mrs Matley's medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Matley was a widow. About twenty years before her death, she went to live with Mrs Wilson and her husband. It became increasingly difficult for Mrs Wilson to care for her mother at home and, about a year before her death, it was decided that Mrs Matley should move to Charnley House. Mrs Matley suffered from Paget's disease and could walk only with the aid of a Zimmer frame. She had difficulty in climbing stairs. In other respects she had reasonable health and Mrs Wilson says that her mother did not suffer from heart problems. Indeed, she was shocked at the news that her mother's death had been attributed to heart disease.
Ms Kilgariff does not recall Mrs Matley, although she was working alternate night shifts at the time of Mrs Matley's death. Ms Kilgariff says that both entrances to Charnley House were locked at night and, if visitors arrived, they would have to ring a bell. If a doctor were called out during her night shift, she would record that fact in the desk diary. Further, she says that, although there was no rule stipulating that members of staff should remain with a doctor visiting a patient, she did so on her own initiative, unless, for example, she went to make a cup of tea or coffee for the doctor.
The Events Leading up to Death
The course of events leading to Mrs Matley's death can be followed from the daily diary, which was compiled by several members of staff.
Early in the morning of Friday, 27th
July, Mrs Matley fell on the bedroom floor. She was taken to Ashton General Hospital at 9am. She returned to the home at 3.45pm and was due to return to hospital for review on Wednesday, 1st
August.
On the morning of 28th
July, Mrs Matley fell out of bed and the staff found it difficult to lift her.
On the morning of Monday, 30th
July, Mrs Matley was not well and did not eat her breakfast. The following day, her health must have been giving cause for concern, as Shipman called to see her. He prescribed an antibiotic for her chest and Acupan, which is an opioid analgesic prescribed for moderate pain. On Wednesday, 1st
August, Mrs Matley was taken to Tameside General Hospital at 2.30pm and returned at 7.30pm. The following morning, she would not eat breakfast and was said to be
'quite upset'
, possibly because she was due to be returned to the hospital at 8.30am. There is no note of the time of her return but she must have been returned because, on the following morning, 3rd
August, she was due to be taken to the hospital again at 8.30am. The daily diary does not indicate why these visits were necessary. However, it appears that Mrs Matley was returned to Charnley House later in the day, as the diary reports that she had eaten well.
The evening report for Sunday, 5th
August records that Mrs Matley had a very sore back and the night report records
'all care given to poorley
(
sic
)
ladies'
and, although Mrs Matley was not mentioned by name, it is likely that she was amongst those to whom such care was given.
On the morning of Monday, 6th
August, Mrs Matley was
'not well'
and the doctor was to visit the following day. The evening report records that her temperature was very high and that she had difficulty in breathing. The night report records as follows:
'
Mrs Matley
does not seem any better, although
her breathing is
easier
a bit better than last night,
her temp. seems to have dropped. Only had drink
at Brekfast
(
sic
)
'
.
Mrs Wilson went on holiday on Monday, 6th
August. She had seen her mother each day during the week before she went away and, although she remembers that her mother was confused at times, she does not remember her as being particularly unwell. She does not know why her mother was taken to hospital on numerous occasions during the last week of her life and was, until recently, unaware of those visits. Mrs Wilson and her husband considered cancelling their holiday and discussed the possibility with the staff at Charnley House. She remembers being told that her mother would be all right and that they had residents who were far more ill.
The Death
Mrs Matley's name appears in Shipman's visits book on Tuesday, 7th
August 1979. The Charnley House daily diary records that Shipman visited her, left a prescription and said that he would call again on Thursday. There is no note of the nature of the drug prescribed. Mrs Stansfield created that entry and she assumes that she accompanied Shipman during the visit, as was her usual practice. She says that there were occasions when she would be sent out of the room by a doctor, perhaps to fetch a utensil or a spoon, so she would not necessarily always be present throughout a visit. She is sure that, if Shipman had given an injection during that visit, she would have recorded the fact. The evening report records that Mrs Matley was very unwell, that she had a high temperature and difficulty in breathing.
The night report records that Mrs Matley died at 4.15am, which would have been on 8th
August.
Mrs Wilson learned of her mother's death following her return from holiday.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman recorded that Mrs Matley died from congestive heart failure due to ischaemic heart disease. He said that he had last seen her alive on 7th
August, which is consistent with his own visits book and the Charnley House diary. He said that he had seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 8th
August 1979.
Mrs Matley was buried so there are no cremation documents.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Matley died a natural death. It appears from the Charnley House diary that she became increasingly ill over the last two days of her life. Although the symptoms described in the diary would suggest that she had a chest infection, it is possible that she was suffering from congestive heart failure. Either of those conditions could have resulted in her death.
The evidence suggests that Shipman last saw Mrs Matley alive on 7th
August. The diary does not record that he gave her an injection or treatment of any kind. It is, therefore, likely that he did not. However, even if he had given an injection of an opiate and Mrs Stansfield had failed to record the fact, there would be no reason to suspect that it caused Mrs Matley's death. Shipman usually visited Charnley House around lunchtime. If he visited at lunchtime on 7th
August, Mrs Matley lived for about 15 hours after the visit. Even if his visit was later than usual, she seems to have lived for at least 12 hours afterwards. It is theoretically possible that Shipman could have gained access to Mrs Matley and given her a lethal injection in the middle of the night. In my view, this possibility can be discounted. The doors of Charnley House were locked at night.
A further theoretical possibility is that Shipman might have sedated Mrs Matley on 7th
August. Over-sedation can cause increased vulnerability to bronchopneumonia, a common mechanism of death in the elderly. I do not think Shipman sedated Mrs Matley. Not only is there no record of any injection in the daily diary, the evidence suggests that Mrs Matley was not unconscious during the evening of 7th
August.
I hope that this decision will have served to reassure Mrs Wilson and her family that Shipman did not play any unlawful part in Mrs Matley's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001