The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Miriam Rose Emily Mycock
Introduction
Mrs Miriam Rose Emily Mycock died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Thursday, 3rd
April 1980 at the age of 91. She was a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Lilian Stansfield (the manager at Charnley House at the time of Mrs Mycock's death) and Mrs Lynn Elizabeth Lanceley (the current manager of Charnley House). The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1980 and the Charnley House diaries and admissions register. Mrs Mycock's medical records have not survived. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Very little is known about Mrs Mycock's personal background. According to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), she was a retired state registered nurse and a widow. She was admitted to Charnley House on 25th
March 1978, just over two years before she died. Her next of kin was said to be her granddaughter, a Mrs Cooke of Walton-le-Dale.
The Charnley House diary records Mrs Mycock's admission on 25th
March 1978 and that she brought with her a number of different types of tablets.
According to the available generic evidence from Charnley House, an entry was made in the Charnley House diary when a resident was unwell or if for some other reason a resident's condition was to be brought to the attention of the staff on the next shift. If a resident's name does not appear in the Charnley House diary, it may reasonably be inferred that the resident was well or at least that his or her condition was stable.
There are a number of entries relating to Mrs Mycock in late February and early March 1980. She suffered from a stomach upset that caused her to be sick on a number of occasions, particularly in the evenings. She also complained of a sore back. She consulted Shipman on at least three occasions and on 4th
March 1980 he prescribed what is referred to in the daily diary as
'MORPH GERNTETALL'
, to be taken as required. Given Mrs Mycock's history, it is likely that this was a morphine-kaolin preparation, although the medication is not listed in the British National Formulary. Such preparations contain very low doses of morphine. Mrs Mycock appears to have recovered and her name does not appear in the daily diary during the last two weeks of her life.
The morning report for Wednesday, 2nd
April 1980 records that Shipman had called at the home and that Mrs Mycock was to be given a low fat, high milk diet. She was to be moved to a different room. The diary gives no indication of why Shipman had been called or why Mrs Mycock was to be moved. However, the night report for Wednesday, 2nd
April records that Mrs Mycock was
'moaning all night'
.
The Day of the Death
The morning report in the Charnley House diary records:
'
Mrs M Mycock
pass away 9.20 massive coronary. DR Shipman
called to be taken to masseys'
.
The author of that entry, Ms Elaine Smythe, has since died. Although the entry is possibly ambiguous, it would appear that Shipman was called after Mrs Mycock had died. Her body was to be taken to the premises of Massey's, the undertakers.
We know from an application for approval made by Shipman in January 1990 to the Tameside Family Practitioners Committee that, at that time, his Thursday morning surgery ran from 8.45am until about 11am. There is no evidence to suggest that the surgery times substantially altered during Shipman's time at Donneybrook and it is likely that those were the surgery hours on Thursdays in 1980. According to the Charnley House diary, Mrs Mycock died at a time when Shipman was probably seeing patients at the surgery. It is, however, quite possible that Shipman called at Charnley House that day, before Mrs Mycock died.
Mrs Mycock's name appears in Shipman's visits book for the eve of her death, Wednesday, 2nd
April, and the day of her death, Thursday, 3rd
April 1980.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not been recovered but the counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman recorded that he had last seen Mrs Mycock alive on 2nd April 1980, the day before she died. He said that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination. Shipman said that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis. He said nothing about the underlying conditions leading to the death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Mycock had died at 9.20am, that he had been her ordinary medical attendant for 2
years and that he had attended her during her last illness over the past three months. He claimed that he had last seen Mrs Mycock alive 24 hours before her death and said that he saw the body within two hours after her death. The cause of death was as stated on the MCCD counterfoil. Shipman said that the mode of death was syncope lasting 20 minutes. He claimed that the answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on statements made by the staff at Charnley House. He said that the matron had been present at the moment of death. Mrs Stansfield was the matron or manager at Charnley House at the time of the death and, after examining the diary, says that she was not working during the week of Mrs Mycock's death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker examined the cremation forms and concluded that the death of Mrs Mycock was not suspicious.
Conclusion
Very little is known about Mrs Mycock's health or even why she moved into Charnley House. The reason for the concern as to her condition on 2nd
April, the day before she died, is not clear. Nor have I any idea why Mrs Mycock was moaning in the night of 2nd
to 3rd
April. If she had chest pain (such as might be the precursor of a heart attack) one might expect the staff to telephone Shipman early in the morning. It is not clear from the entry whether or not they did.
There seem to be several possibilities. One is that Mrs Mycock died a natural death at 9.20am and that Shipman came some time later to certify the cause of death. Another is that Shipman was summoned very early, called on his way to the surgery, at, say, about 8.30am, found Mrs Mycock to be in pain and gave her an injection of opiate. She then died at 9.20am. If he gave her an injection of opiate, I would not be able to say whether or not the injection had caused or hastened her death. My experience of the Charnley House diaries leads me to believe that, on occasions, they did not contain a complete account of all that had happened. That is not to say that members of staff were knowingly concealing relevant matters. It seems entirely possible to me that the member of staff making the morning shift report would not think it important to record if Shipman visited twice.
For the reasons I have outlined, I find myself unable to decide whether Mrs Mycock died of natural causes or as the result of an unlawful act by Shipman.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001