The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Sarah Hannah Marsland
Introduction
Mrs Sarah Hannah Marsland died at her home, Flat 30 Ashton House, Victoria Street, Hyde on Monday, 7th
August 1978 at the age of 86. She was a widow and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
In August 2001, Mrs Marsland's granddaughter, Mrs Celia Anne Saxton, provided a statement to the Inquiry in connection with the death of her aunt, Mrs Irene Chapman. At the same time, she mentioned that she was also concerned about the death of her grandmother, who had died suddenly in Shipman's presence in 1978. The Inquiry decided to investigate Mrs Marsland's death.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Saxton and Mrs Susan Antrobus (Mrs Saxton's sister). The Inquiry has had access to the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). No practice documents have been recovered for this period. Mrs Marsland's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Marsland lived in a warden-controlled flat at Ashton House. Although her grandmother was elderly, Mrs Saxton does not remember her suffering from any particular health problems. Apart from a long-standing injury to her arm, she was, according to Mrs Saxton, in 'very good health'.
Mrs Saxton used to visit her grandmother twice a week. She would drive her into Hyde and they would visit the market and shops.
A few weeks before her own death, Mrs Marsland suffered bereavement when her elder daughter, Cicely, died. Mrs Marsland was greatly distressed at this event. However, Mrs Antrobus recalls that her grandmother was recovering from this and was in good health and spirits on Sunday 6th
August, when there was a family gathering.
Mrs Antrobus recalls that Shipman was very popular with elderly patients, as he would always find time to visit them at home, and says that he used to call in to see her grandmother from time to time to see how she was.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Saxton did not see her grandmother on the day of the death but has provided an account of the circumstances of her death, based on her recollection of what Mrs Chapman later told her.
Mrs Chapman told Mrs Saxton that she had called to see Mrs Marsland after work and had found her lying on her back on the bed, with Shipman leaning over her. He said that he had called in to see Mrs Marsland, in order to see if she was 'all right'. He said she had not asked him to visit. Mrs Chapman told Mrs Saxton that Shipman said he had found Mrs Marsland sitting in a chair and had moved her onto the bed. He told Mrs Chapman that Mrs Marsland had said, 'I just get this awful pain when I think of Cicely'. She had then collapsed and died. Shipman claimed to have tried unsuccessfully to bring her round.
There was an emergency cord in Mrs Marsland's flat and, to the best of Mrs Saxton's knowledge, Mrs Marsland did not pull the cord to alert the warden on the day of her death.
Mrs Antrobus was also given an account of the circumstances of the death but she is not now sure whether she received this directly from her aunt, Mrs Chapman, or from her father, who would have got it from Mrs Chapman. In any event, her description of what she was told of the death is very similar to Mrs Saxton's account, which I am satisfied came directly from Mrs Chapman.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD and, although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been recovered. It records that Shipman last saw Mrs Marsland alive on the day of her death, that a post-mortem examination would not be performed and that Shipman had seen the body after death. The certified cause of death was coronary thrombosis. No underlying cause was specified.
Mrs Marsland was buried and there are no cremation documents.
Conclusion
Very little information is available to me in respect of this death. Although this case has been considered without an oral hearing, I have had the advantage of hearing Mrs Saxton give evidence in connection with the death of Mrs Irene Chapman, who was killed by Shipman in 1998. I regard her as an honest witness. However, the accounts she and Mrs Antrobus have provided are what they can remember of what they were told over 20 years ago. Since that time, much has been written about Shipman's activities and there will no doubt have been much discussion of Shipman within the extended family. If the facts were as they now relate, I find it strange that Mrs Saxton, in particular, did not feel or express any concern about her grandmother's death during the three years between September 1998 and August 2001. As a result, I must approach the accounts with caution. That is not to suggest that I think the witnesses are not telling the truth. My concern is that their memories might have been affected by what they have learned of Shipman over the last three years.
Having said that, Mrs Saxton gives so graphic an account of the scene Mrs Chapman described that I am inclined to accept it. I accept that Shipman did make unsolicited visits to elderly patients and I have no reason to doubt Mrs Antrobus' word that he called on Mrs Marsland from time to time. I am satisfied from the contents of the MCCD counterfoil that Shipman saw Mrs Marsland on the day of her death, and the entries are certainly consistent with the evidence that he was present at the moment of death. If Shipman had been called out because Mrs Marsland was seriously ill, it would not be entirely surprising if she died in his presence. If she died during an unsolicited visit, this would arouse a very high degree of suspicion. It would be a remarkable coincidence.
Little is known about Mrs Marsland's state of health. Mrs Saxton says that she enjoyed good health. However, she was 86. It is the experience of the Inquiry that where a death occurred a long time ago, witnesses can and often do innocently paint a rosier picture of a relative's health than that which appears from hospital or other contemporaneous notes and records, where available. However, there is some support for the witnesses' claim that their grandmother was well. I note that on, the MCCD counterfoil, Shipman did not suggest that Mrs Marsland had any chronic heart condition which had given rise to the coronary thrombosis. I cannot rule out the possibility that Mrs Marsland had underlying cardiac disease. She was, on account of her age alone, at some risk of having a sudden fatal heart attack. However, that the risk should strike at the very moment when Shipman was visiting would be a very great coincidence. In so saying, I rely on the generic evidence of Dr John Grenville, who said that, for a doctor to be present at the death of a patient at home, where that patient was not suffering from a terminal illness or called out as an emergency, is a very rare event which might occur perhaps once in a doctor's professional career.
If Shipman had killed Mrs Marsland just before Mrs Chapman arrived, I find it strange that he should have volunteered the information that he had just called on her to see if she was 'all right'. It seems to me more likely that he would say that he had come because Mrs Marsland was ill. If he had made an unsolicited call, someone might think it was rather a coincidence that Mrs Marsland had died while he was there. This might suggest that he had not killed her and that the death, at that moment, was a genuine coincidence. I think that is unlikely and it is far more likely that Mrs Saxton's memory is at fault in this respect. It is also possible that such matters did not worry Shipman.
Shipman apparently claimed to have attempted to 'bring Mrs Marsland round', by which he probably meant that he had attempted to resuscitate her. If he said that, it must have been untrue. According to the evidence of Dr Grenville, cardiopulmonary resuscitation is most effectively carried out with the assistance of another person. As Mrs Marsland lived in warden-controlled accommodation and had an emergency cord within her flat, it is likely that assistance was readily available. Shipman does not appear to have called for the warden. To give effective resuscitation, the patient must be laid on a firm flat surface. Usually the floor is the only suitable place. If Shipman had tried to resuscitate Mrs Marsland, I would have expected that he would have put her on the floor and would probably have left her there if and when he gave up his attempts.
There are some features of this death which bear the hallmark of a case in which Shipman killed. The mere fact that the death took place in Shipman's presence following what was probably an unsolicited visit, is enough to persuade me that he probably killed Mrs Marsland. Because of the hearsay nature of the evidence and the absence of medical and surgery records, I cannot be sure of this conclusion. However, I find that Shipman probably killed Mrs Marsland.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001