The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Gertrude McLoughlin
Introduction
Mrs Gertrude McLoughlin died at her home, 30 Sidley Place, Hyde on Thursday, 10th
May 1979 at the age of 83. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was senility.
In August 2001, the Inquiry wrote to Mr Eric Joseph McLoughlin, Mrs McLoughlin's son and the informant who registered her death. He responded, expressing concern about the circumstances of his mother's death. The Inquiry investigated the death and took statements from Mr McLoughlin and Mrs Margaret Toole, Mrs McLoughlin's daughter. The Inquiry has had access to the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and Shipman's visits book for 1979. Mrs McLoughlin's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs McLoughlin was married to Mr Arthur McLoughlin and they had seven children. For most of her life she was a very healthy and active woman. She was a widow at the time of her death and was living alone. Her son, Mr Eric McLoughlin, was very close to his mother and saw her several times each week.
Some years before her death, Mrs McLoughlin sustained fractures of the pelvis and hip in a road traffic accident. She was left with a limp. She remained largely independent until shortly before she died, and received the assistance of a home help.
Shipman visited Mrs McLoughlin regularly. According to Dr Ian Napier, who also practised from the Donneybrook Surgery at that time, all the doctors visited their elderly patients on a monthly basis. After Mrs McLoughlin's accident, Shipman used to give her injections into her hip. When she was expecting him she would leave the front door unlocked.
About a year before her death Mrs McLoughlin's sister died. Following this, Mrs McLoughlin became very withdrawn. She would often sit in her chair staring into space. She would not talk to those around her until they had been present for some time. However, in time she began to recover from her loss.
The Death
Mr Eric McLoughlin recalls that about two weeks before her death, Mrs McLoughlin began to feel unwell. The nature of her illness is not clear. She stayed in bed, saying that she was resting. Her family took food to her and one of her children stayed with her each night. She was bedridden for at least the last week of her life. Although Mr McLoughlin cannot remember Shipman's visits, it is clear that he did visit. Mrs McLoughlin's name appears in his visits book on Monday, 30th
April, Thursday, 3rd
May, Tuesday, 8th May and Wednesday, 9th
May. Mr McLoughlin's recollection is that he did not realise that his mother was seriously ill and expected her to recover. He saw her during the evening before her death and cannot remember anything out of the ordinary.
Mrs Toole does not recall that her mother deteriorated in the last two weeks. However, she does remember that on the Tuesday morning before the death she was summoned home from work by Mrs Dora McLoughlin, Mr Eric McLoughlin's wife, who had been with Mrs McLoughlin that morning. Mrs Dora McLoughlin told her that Shipman had visited and had said that Mrs McLoughlin was dying. Mrs Toole's recollection is that when she arrived home her mother was sitting in a chair but was not speaking. The family, who by now were congregating at the house, put her into bed. From that time until her death, Mrs McLoughlin did not speak. She was unable to eat and could take no liquid other than a sip of water. The family took turns to sit with her. There was no change in her condition the following day and in the early hours of Thursday, 10th
May, Mrs Toole received a message to say that her mother had died. She believed that her sister, Mrs Kathleen Palmer, and Mrs Palmer's husband, Mr Terry Palmer, were present at the death.
Mr Eric McLoughlin has told the Inquiry that he was not present at the death and heard of it by telephone. As far as he knows, Shipman was not present when Mrs McLoughlin died. He does say, however: 'He (
Shipman
) might have been there earlier the day before and he might have given her a needle and killed her. I think he probably did'.
Mr McLoughlin recalls that Shipman came to the flat after Mrs McLoughlin's death. He asked Shipman why Mrs McLoughlin had died and Shipman said that her body had 'just worn out'.
Certification
The MCCD has not survived, but the counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman recorded that the cause of death was senility. He stated that ischaemic heart disease had contributed to the death but was not related to the immediate cause of death. He said that he had last seen Mrs McLoughlin alive on 9th
May 1979, the day before she died. It was recorded that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that, although Shipman had not seen the body after death, another medical practitioner had. Therefore, if Mr McLoughlin's recollection is correct and Shipman did come to the flat on 10th
May, and if Shipman completed the MCCD counterfoil accurately, the body must have been taken away by the undertakers prior to his arrival. This would be an unusual circumstance. I think it more likely that another doctor called at the flat to certify the fact of death and that Mr McLoughlin's conversation with Shipman took place at the surgery, possibly when he called to collect the MCCD.
Mrs Toole is adamant that her mother did not die of senility. She says she was mentally very alert and that her illness was short. In fact, senility is used interchangeably with old age as a cause of death and does not necessarily imply a lack of mental alertness.
Conclusion
In the absence of the medical records it is not possible to discover the nature of the last illness, which seems to have begun, as Mr McLoughlin recalls, about two weeks before the death. According to the visits book, Shipman visited Mrs McLoughlin with increasing frequency from 30th April and was at her home on 8th
and 9th
May.
It is not possible to form a clear picture of the events preceding Mrs McLoughlin's death as the two witnesses have rather different recollections. However, there is nothing in the statement of either witness to suggest that the visits book is inaccurate.
There is no evidence that Shipman gave Mrs McLoughlin any specific treatment during any of his visits and certainly no evidence that he administered any injections. Even if he had given an injection on Wednesday, 9th
May, as Mr McLoughlin suggests, that injection could not have contained a lethal dose of opiate and could not have caused Mrs McLoughlin's death in the early hours of Thursday morning. Professor Henry McQuay and Dr John Grenville have given joint generic evidence to the Inquiry as to the timing and effect of opiates. If a lethal injection of opiate is administered intravenously, death will follow within minutes. If administered intramuscularly, a lethal dose will cause death within about an hour. That Mrs McLoughlin lived for at least 12 hours after Shipman's last visit shows that Shipman did not directly cause her death by giving a lethal dose of opiate.
I have considered also the possibility that Shipman might have over-sedated Mrs McLoughlin during the last few days of her life. Over-sedation can render an elderly patient more vulnerable to the development of bronchopneumonia, a common mechanism of death in the elderly. However, there is no evidence that Mrs McLoughlin was unconscious in the last few days. On the contrary, Mr McLoughlin says that he expected his mother to recover and he can recall nothing out of the ordinary when he saw her on the evening before she died. I rule out the possibility of over-sedation.
I am quite satisfied that Mrs McLoughlin died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001