The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Christina McCulloch Mackie
Introduction
Mrs Christina McCulloch Mackie died at Pole Bank Residential Care Home (Pole Bank Hall) in Hyde on Friday, 1st
February 1985 at the age of 83. She had probably been a patient of Shipman for about five years. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, the cremation certificate, Shipman's visits book for 1985 and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book. Mrs Mackie's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
Mrs Mackie was born in Glasgow on 6th
April 1901. She was the widow of Mr George Campbell Mackie, who had been a clerk.
Mrs Mackie's son, Mr George Campbell Mackie, was the informant named in the death certificate. In October 2001, the Inquiry sent Mr Mackie a copy of Form B of the cremation certificate, which had been completed by Shipman, and asked him whether or not he had any concerns about Shipman's possible involvement in his mother's death. Mr Mackie replied that all the details provided in Form B were correct, and said that he had no concerns about Shipman's possible involvement in his mother's death.
The Inquiry has also been in contact with Mrs Dorothy Partridge, who was the matron on duty at Pole Bank Hall when Mrs Mackie died. She was only able to recall laying Mrs Mackie out, in anticipation of the arrival of her son. Mrs Partridge does not remember Shipman visiting either before or after Mrs Mackie's death. Five other members of staff have been contacted. Those who remember Mrs Mackie, recall that she was confused and quite difficult to communicate with. Mrs Partridge remembers that she was quite active and used to walk around Pole Bank Hall waving her walking stick. No one recollects Mrs Mackie having suffered any specific illness.
The only evidence of the circumstances of the death comes from the forms of the cremation certificate. Although this contains information provided by Shipman, and would usually be treated with caution, Mr Mackie has said that it is accurate. It appears that Mrs Mackie was well and active for some time while resident at Pole Bank Hall. She then began to suffer from dementia. According to Shipman, she died of old age. On Form B, Shipman said that he had attended her during her last illness for two weeks, for ten days of which she was in a coma. He also said that she had been nursed during the last illness by the staff at Pole Bank Hall. As he certified that the cause of death was old age, it would seem likely that Mrs Mackie had deteriorated gradually over a period of time and became confined to bed.
Shipman said that he had last seen Mrs Mackie alive on 30th
January 1985, two days before her death. He said that no one had been present at her death and that she had been found by a member of staff carrying out routine duties. Shipman said that he saw Mrs Mackie's body approximately three hours after her death, when he carried out a complete external examination of it. He identified senile dementia as a morbid condition which contributed to the death, but was not related to the immediate cause.
Shipman's visits book for 1985 contains some corroboration of his entries on Form B. It appears that he had visited Mrs Mackie on Wednesday, 23rd
January, on Saturday, 26th
January and, as he stated on the MCCD counterfoil, on Wednesday, 30th
January. It would appear that 30th
January was the last day when he saw Mrs Mackie alive for her name does not appear in the visits book for 31st
January 1985 and, whilst it does appear in the visits book for the day of her death, it is the last of six names mentioned there. It is likely that Shipman was called out to certify the death, but it is also possible that he was called out to see Mrs Mackie while she was still alive but that she died before he arrived at Pole Bank Hall.
Professor Richard Baker did not regard the contents of Form B as suspicious.
Conclusion
It seems very likely that Mrs Mackie died of natural causes.
There is very little evidence of Mrs Mackie's health in the weeks before her death. It would appear that Mrs Mackie became senile and deteriorated gradually. She was said to have been in a coma for ten days before her death. If that is right, as her son confirms that it is, her death cannot have been sudden or unexpected.
The only information about Shipman's access to Mrs Mackie comes from Shipman's visits book for 1985 and his entries on the MCCD counterfoil and Form B. All these documents suggest that Shipman last saw Mrs Mackie alive two days before her death.
I cannot absolutely rule out the possibility that Shipman visited Mrs Mackie on the day of her death and injected her with a lethal substance. However, there is no reason to suppose that he did. As I have said, it seems highly likely that Mrs Mackie died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001