The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
William James McLaren
Introduction
Mr William James McLaren died at Bowlacre, a residential home for the elderly, Elson Drive, Stockport Road, Gee Cross, Hyde on Tuesday, 28th
April 1981 at the age of 86. He had been a patient of Shipman since moving to Bowlacre in about January 1981. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was
'brain failure'
.
There has been no inquest into this death.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Alexander James McLaren, Mr McLaren's son, and has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1981, the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
In 1979, following the death of his wife, Mr McLaren went to live with his son in Glossop, Derbyshire. He stayed for about a year, during which time his health was quite good. His son recalls that Mr McLaren took tablets for 'water retention' but says he did not suffer any life threatening illnesses. He did, however, become increasingly forgetful and often needed help with daily activities, such as taking a bath. Mr McLaren also became breathless on climbing the stairs and would complain that his legs were stiff.
Following his move to Bowlacre, Mr McLaren's health deteriorated quite rapidly. He became very confused and sometimes would not recognise his son when he came to visit. Shipman visited frequently during the last few weeks of Mr McLaren's life and prescribed several different types of medication. Mr McLaren lost weight, and on later occasions when Mr Alexander McLaren visited, he found that his father was being nursed in a special chair.
Mr Alexander McLaren visited his father on the evening of 27th
April. His father was conscious and able to speak but was weak and confused, although not significantly more so than he had been in the previous two to three weeks. There was nothing about his condition to cause Mr Alexander McLaren to think that his father had only a few hours to live.
Mr McLaren's name appears in Shipman's visits book for 14th
, 24th
and 27th
April 1981.
The Day of the Death
Mr Alexander McLaren recalls that he received a telephone call from a member of staff at the home between 10am and 11am on 28th
April and was told that his father had died during the night. He recalls that the member of staff apologised for the delay in informing him about his father's death. An explanation was given but Mr Alexander McLaren cannot now recall what it was. He says that he was not surprised by his father's death, as it had been clear to him that his father was unwell.
The following entry appears in Shipman's visits book for the day of the death, suggesting that Shipman was called out to certify the death:
'McLaren Bowlacre. died'
.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that Mr McLaren died on 28th
April at Bowlacre. He said that he had last seen Mr McLaren alive on 27th
April, which is consistent with the entry in the visits book. He also said that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination.
There are no cremation documents.
Conclusion
The evidence suggests that Mr McLaren's health had deteriorated gradually during his time at Bowlacre and, when it occurred, his death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
Mr Alexander McLaren was told that his father had died during the night of 27th
to 28th
April. Although he was not informed about the death until the middle of the morning, there is no reason to suspect that the information he was given about the time of death was untrue. He was given an explanation for the delay in making contact and he seems to have accepted the explanation as genuine at the time. As the death was said to have occurred on 28th
April, I infer that the death took place some time between midnight and about 6am.
It seems likely that Shipman visited on 27th
April. His usual visiting hours were between about 11.30am and 3.30pm. It seems likely therefore that Shipman last saw Mr McLaren at least eight hours before he died and probably rather longer than that. As Mr McLaren was conscious when his son visited that evening, I can say with confidence that Shipman had not that day given Mr McLaren any drug which caused his death. There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman visited Mr McLaren during the night in which he died. Indeed, it would be most unusual for Shipman to turn out in the night unless there was a real emergency.
I am quite satisfied that Mr McLaren died of natural causes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001