The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Hannah Moss
Introduction
Mrs Hannah Moss died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 15th
March 1983 at the age of 82. She was probably a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed advertisements publishing a list of cases in which the Inquiry had only limited information as to the circumstances of death and in which no relatives had been traced. In response to that advertisement, the Inquiry was contacted by Mrs Moss' daughter, Mrs A Wilde (formerly Aspinall). She wrote a letter to the Inquiry stating that the only information that she could offer was that she had received a telephone call (presumably from Charnley House) to say that her mother had died suddenly and that Shipman had attended. So far as she was aware, her mother had been in fairly good health, although she had slight angina. She had seen her mother on the day before her death, when she seemed her usual self.
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs Moss, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, Shipman's visits book and the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
Mrs Moss was the widow of Mr Walter Moss, a labourer. She was admitted to Charnley House on 9th
February 1983, five weeks before she died, from 9 Lilac Avenue, Hyde. It would appear that she lived there with her daughter. From what Mrs Wilde has told the Inquiry, her mother had a history of mild angina.
The Charnley House diary reveals that, on Thursday, 10th
March, Mrs Moss was suffering from a bout of diarrhoea. Shipman saw her that day, according to the daily diary. She had not recovered by the weekend and was reported to have felt sick for much of the time and slept badly. On the morning of Monday, 14th
March, Mrs Moss was still complaining of feeling sick. She was given some medication and a light diet. That afternoon, she took a small amount of tea but at 5.30pm she suffered an angina attack. A tablet was put under her tongue. Her skin was recorded to be very clammy and her colour was said to be
'not very good'
. She was left to rest on top of her bed. She was to be observed. Mrs Moss suffered another disturbed night. She was awake all night with pains in her stomach and was said to have a very bad colour on the morning of 15th
March. She died at 9.30am. There is no record that Shipman visited that morning or, indeed, that he had visited on any occasion after 10th
March.
Mrs Moss' name appears in Shipman's visits book for the day of her death. Her name appears as the fourth in a list of approximately eight names and the word
'dead'
appears after her name. Immediately beneath her name is the name of her daughter and it seems at least possible that Shipman had received the news from Charnley House that Mrs Moss had died, that he was asked to certify the fact and/or cause of death and at the same time he was supplied with Mrs Aspinall's name.
Certification
It would appear that Shipman completed the MCCD on 15th
March 1983, the day of the death. He said, inaccurately, that he had last seen Mrs Moss alive on 8th
March 1983. It seems, in fact, from the Charnley House diary that it was on 10th
March 1983 that he had last seen her. Shipman recorded that there was to be no post-mortem examination and that he had seen Mrs Moss' body after death. He said that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis and that this had been due to ischaemic heart disease.
Conclusion
On the basis of the information available, it would seem likely that Mrs Moss suffered from ischaemic heart disease. Her daughter recalls that she had slight angina. The daily diary refers to an angina attack. She had the type of medication usually prescribed for angina. There is also some evidence from which it can be inferred that Mrs Moss' angina had worsened shortly before her death. It appears that Mrs Moss was very unwell on the night before her death and was a bad colour in the morning. The symptoms described during the night do not sound typical of a cardiac problem but it is entirely possible that they were, or were at least a mixture of bowel and cardiac problems. The daily diary does not describe a painful event, such as a heart attack. It says that Mrs Moss passed peacefully away. I have learned to be sceptical of such entries as it appears that the staff always used to write words of that kind in the diary, whatever the mode of death had been. It is entirely possible that Mrs Moss had had a heart attack and the staff would still describe her end as peaceful.
That Mrs Moss is recorded as having died at 9.30am makes it unlikely that Shipman was involved in any sinister way in her death. He was working that day and in all likelihood had a list of patients to see in the surgery before he went out on his visits. By the time Mrs Moss' name was entered in his visits book, three other visit requests had already been made.
Although I cannot rule out the possibility that Shipman went to Charnley House on the morning of 15th
March and injected Mrs Moss with a lethal substance, it seems to me to be highly unlikely that he did. In summary, the likelihood is that Mrs Moss died of natural causes and that Shipman is not in any way implicated in her death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001