The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Margaret Metcalfe
Introduction
Mrs Margaret Metcalfe died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Friday, 13th
May 1983 at the age of 84. She was probably a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was senility.
The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') names Mr Ronald Porter, the husband of Mrs Metcalfe's niece, as the informant in relation to Mrs Metcalfe's death. He and his wife, Mrs Helen Porter, have been traced to their home in Tenerife. They had no concerns about Mrs Metcalfe's death and say that it followed a gradual deterioration in her physical health. They were not present at the death but were notified of it some time later.
The Inquiry has had access to the death certificate relating to Mrs Metcalfe, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, Shipman's visits book, the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Metcalfe was the widow of Mr Samuel Metcalfe. She was admitted to Charnley House on 20th
March 1983. The admissions register records that her next of kin was Mrs Porter.
The daily diary reveals that Mrs Metcalfe did not initially settle well at Charnley House. In the two weeks before her death, she suffered from diarrhoea and her behaviour seems to have been quite agitated. She also fell on a number of occasions. On Tuesday, 3rd
May, Mrs Metcalfe was seen by Shipman, who changed her medication. By Saturday, 7th
May, Mrs Metcalfe's physical condition seems to have improved but she was again quite agitated and fell to the floor several times. On that day and the following day she was nursed in a Buxton chair to prevent further falls.
Mrs Metcalfe was seen again by Shipman on Monday, 9th
May. He said that she should have fluids only and she was given an egg and milk drink. He reduced her dosage of Melleril, which is an anti-psychotic drug, and asked that a urine sample be taken. This was done the next day and the result was negative.
The daily diary records that Shipman attended to see Mrs Metcalfe on Wednesday, 11th
May. By this time, Mrs Metcalfe was quite poorly and taking only a little fluid. The relevant note reads:
'MRS METCALFE -:
DR CALLED TO SEE HER. WILL CALL AGAIN SATURDAY.
IF SHE IS STILL HERE?'
.
That evening Mrs Metcalfe took very little fluid. She was put to bed at 7pm. That night, she was given
'all care'
and took some fluids.
On Thursday, 12th
May, Mrs Metcalfe had a raised temperature. Her pressure sores were treated, she did not take fluids well and she was very agitated. That evening, she was very poorly and had difficulty in swallowing.
The Day of the Death
The daily diary records that Mrs Metcalfe
'passed peacefully away'
at 7am on Friday, 13th
May 1983. The morning report confirms that all formalities were attended to and that her body was removed from Charnley House at 1.45pm.
Mrs Metcalfe's name appears in Shipman's visits book for 13th
May. It is the seventh of nine names which appear in the visits book for that day. The word
'Dead'
appears after her name and it is highly likely that the staff asked Shipman to call at the home to certify the death.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD counterfoil on Friday, 13th
May 1983, the day of the death. He said that he had last seen Mrs Metcalfe alive on 12th
May 1983, but there is no other documentary record of a visit on that day. It seems likely that Shipman made a mistake and should have said that he had last seen Mrs Metcalfe alive on 11th
May. He said that there was to be no post-mortem examination and that he had seen Mrs Metcalfe's body after her death.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Metcalfe died of natural causes. The Charnley House daily diary records a gradual deterioration, which is entirely consistent with a death due to multiple organ failure for which old age or senility is an appropriate cause of death.
There is no evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Metcalfe in the hours before she died. It would have been surprising had he done so, as she died at 7am. Had he been called out to see her as an emergency, it is very likely that this would have been recorded in the Charnley House diary.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001