The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
George Henry Mottram
Introduction
Mr George Henry Mottram died at Laurel Bank, a residential home for the elderly, Knott Lane, Gee Cross, Hyde on Monday, 19th
February 1996 at the age of 91. He had been a patient of Shipman since moving to Laurel Bank in 1995. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Mottram's death was old age.
The Inquiry has had access to Mr Mottram's medical records, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), its counterfoil, the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the cremation certificate, the appointments and visits books from the Market Street Surgery and the diary from Laurel Bank.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Mottram was a retired railway signalman. He lived alone in Dane Road, Denton until about September 1995, when he was admitted to Laurel Bank and became registered with Shipman. Within his medical records is a letter from Dr Oliver, a consultant in old age psychiatry, dated 19th
July 1995, addressed to Mr Mottram's previous general practitioner, explaining that Mr Mottram was suffering from mild Alzheimer's dementia and it was not safe for him to live alone.
Following his transfer to Laurel Bank, Mr Mottram seems to have enjoyed quite good health. There is nothing in his general practitioner records to suggest that he was unwell or might die a sudden death. In November 1995, he was prescribed temazepam, presumably to help him sleep. He had an episode of acute tonsillitis in December 1995, when he was given an antibiotic and Co-codamol for pain relief. On 22nd
December, he was given another prescription for temazepam. According to his medical records, that was the last time he was seen by Shipman until the day of his death.
On Friday, 16th
February 1996, it appears from the Laurel Bank diary that Mr Mottram had a temperature and the staff were concerned about him. The night care assistant was asked to give him plenty of fluids. Mr Mottram passed a comfortable night on Saturday, 17th
February and on Sunday, 18th
February he seemed much improved, although he did not eat much lunch. It appears that Mr Mottram must have been suffering from tremors, as the diary for that day records that he had not had tremors that day and seemed sleepy. Later that day, Mr Mottram seemed well and was wandering about the home and chatting.
The Day of the Death
Unfortunately, Mr Mottram's fever returned in a rather dramatic way on Monday, 19th
February 1996. The diary records that he was given two paracetamol at 6am because he seemed very hot and was complaining of pain in his neck. It was noted that Shipman would call that day. A little later, another note records that Mr Mottram was hot and clammy.
The next note records that a care assistant called a senior member of staff into Mr Mottram's room. He had a very high temperature, his breathing was poor, he sounded
'very chesty'
and he was coughing up blood. Shipman was called.
It appears from the practice visits book that Shipman was asked to visit three patients at Laurel Bank that morning. Two were said to have chest infections. By Mr Mottram's name the entry says:
'Very chesty - palour
(
sic
)
not
good - neck hurting'
.
The next diary note relating to Mr Mottram, made some time later that morning, records that he died at 11.15am. The entire note reads:
'George M.
had passed away 11.15am. We was
(
sic
)
waiting for
Dr Shipman to call and see him because he
was not very well this morning Dr Shipman
informed. he will call as soon as he can'
.
Shipman called at Laurel Bank later that day to see two patients who had chest infections. It appears that several residents were suffering from chest infections at this time. The diary does not record that Shipman saw Mr Mottram's body that day and suggests that the body might have been removed to the undertakers before Shipman arrived. However, I think it unlikely that the body could have been removed until it had been seen by a doctor, so I think it likely that Shipman saw it when he visited that afternoon.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD and its counterfoil on the day of the death. He said that he had last seen Mr Mottram alive on 16th
February 1996. There is no record of any such visit in any of the documentation available to the Inquiry and it seems likely that Shipman made that up in order to avoid the time and trouble involved in a referral to the coroner.
Shipman said that there was to be no post-mortem examination and that he had seen the body after the death. Whether or not he did is not clear. He said that the cause of death was old age and that Alzheimer's dementia, from which Mr Mottram had been suffering for one year, had contributed to the death.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He wrote that Mr Mottram died at 11.10am on 19th
February 1996. He furnished other details which seem broadly consistent with the other evidence available but he repeated the assertion made on the MCCD that he had last seen Mr Mottram alive shortly before his death, in this case,
'48 hours'
. He said that the mode of death was a coma lasting six to eight hours. I have the impression from the Laurel Bank diary and from the surgery visits book that Mr Mottram was not in a coma. He was given two paracetamol at 6am. His neck was hurting. He was coughing up blood. He cannot have been in a coma.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker had the opportunity to consider both the contents of Mr Mottram's general practitioner records and also the information contained in the cremation forms. On both counts, he found that the death was not suspicious.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mr Mottram died of natural causes and that Shipman played no part in his death. There is no evidence that Shipman had access to Mr Mottram in the hours before his death.
I very much doubt if Mr Mottram's death should have been attributed to old age. He does not appear to have declined gradually. He was not confined to bed but was walking about the home only the day before he died. It sounds to me as though Mr Mottram died as the result of an acute chest infection. He had been ill for a few days and then seemed to recover. He deteriorated suddenly during the night before his death. That morning he had a fever and was coughing blood. I have the impression that Shipman put old age on the MCCD because Mr Mottram was old and no one would query the true cause or manner of his death.
I do not think Shipman saw Mr Mottram on 16th
or 17th
February, as he claimed. I have come across many cases in which there is no suspicion that Shipman caused the death, but in which he is quite cavalier about what he put on the MCCD and cremation forms. I think he did not care what he put, so long as it did not cause him any trouble.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001