The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Charles MacConnell
Introduction
Mr Charles MacConnell died at his home, 130 Foxholes Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 24th
May 1983 at the age of 72. He had been a patient of Shipman probably since 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was right upper lobe bronchial carcinoma.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed advertisements in a number of newspapers publishing a list of cases in which the Inquiry had only limited information as to the circumstances of the death and in which no relatives had been traced. In response to that advertisement, Mr MacConnell's niece, Mrs Jean Griffiths, contacted the Inquiry. Although she herself was unable to provide any information as to the circumstances surrounding her uncle's death, she was able to provide the names of his children.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Marcia Pendlebury, Mr MacConnell's daughter. The Inquiry has also had access to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil and Shipman's visits book for 1983. Mr MacConnell's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr MacConnell lived with his wife, Mrs Laura MacConnell. In 1982, he developed stomach pains and consulted a doctor, probably Shipman. He was referred to Tameside General Hospital for further tests and, on 31st
December 1982, he was diagnosed as suffering from cancer, most likely of the stomach. Mrs Pendlebury recalls that he had a secondary cancer in his lungs. It may be that the cancer became widespread. At the time, the consultant treating Mr MacConnell said that he had a life expectancy of about six months. He subsequently attended the Christie Hospital for chemotherapy. Mrs Pendlebury has said that her father's main passion in life was playing golf and he continued to do so until about the end of April 1983.
During the last month of his life, Mr MacConnell was housebound but still able to move about the house. He found it more comfortable to sleep upright in a chair because he had a tumour on his neck. The tumour also affected his ability to swallow and he was able to eat only soup and soft food. He lost weight.
Mr MacConnell received regular visits from the district nurse. Mrs Pendlebury, who lived in Wales, visited every fortnight and used to stay for a few days at a time in order to help her mother with her father's care. Rather surprisingly, there is no record in Shipman's visits book to suggest that he visited Mr MacConnell in the last few weeks of his life.
Mrs Pendlebury's mother telephoned her on the evening of 22nd
May and asked her to come back to Hyde because she needed some support. On the morning of 23rd
May, Mrs Pendlebury travelled to Hyde, arriving at around lunchtime. Her father was sitting in an armchair dressed in his nightclothes and, although he seemed in good spirits, he was wheezy and had difficulty in breathing. She spent the evening chatting with her father and, when it was time to go to sleep, Mrs Pendlebury slept on the settee in the lounge and her father slept in his armchair. His breathing continued to be wheezy, so much so that Mrs Pendlebury did not sleep well that night.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of 24th
May, Mrs Pendlebury telephoned her brothers, Mr Lynton MacConnell and Mr Tony MacConnell, to say that their father was unwell and that they should come to Hyde to see him. Mrs MacConnell telephoned the consultant treating Mr MacConnell and described his breathing difficulties. The consultant said that he would arrange for somebody to visit. Mr MacConnell then retired to bed. During the course of the afternoon, members of his family sat around his bed chatting to him and then left him to sleep.
Mrs Pendlebury had to go home to her own family and left with her brother Lynton at about 6pm. Her brother Tony left soon afterwards. At that time, the doctor had not been to visit. Mrs Pendlebury remembers that she arrived home at about 8.30pm and telephoned her mother to check on her father's progress. Her mother said that the doctor had been and 'given Dad something'. Mrs Pendlebury cannot remember whether her mother referred to an injection or some other type of medication. The doctor had apparently said 'He'll sleep now' and Mrs MacConnell reported that her husband was sleeping peacefully.
At some time between 9pm and midnight, Mrs Pendlebury's mother telephoned to say that Mr MacConnell had died. Mrs Pendlebury was surprised that he had died so quickly.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that he had last seen Mr MacConnell alive on 24th
May 1983, the day of his death. Mr MacConnell's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book on that date. Shipman also stated on the counterfoil that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination.
Conclusion
It is not possible for me to say whether Mr MacConnell died as a result of natural causes or as a result of an unlawful act on Shipman's part.
Mr MacConnell was terminally ill. He was housebound for the last month of his life and spent the last few days of his life either sitting in a chair or lying in bed. He was suffering from advanced cancer, probably of the stomach and lung. He also had a tumour in his neck. His family had been summoned and it is clear that his death was expected.
It was almost certainly Shipman who came to see Mr MacConnell, after Mrs Pendlebury had left the house at 6pm on 24th
May, because he recorded on the MCCD counterfoil that he had seen Mr MacConnell alive on that day. It appears that he administered some form of medication. Bearing in mind the advanced stage of Mr MacConnell's cancer, he would almost certainly have been justified in giving an injection of morphine or diamorphine for the relief of pain or distress. Although there is no direct evidence to suggest that Shipman did administer an injection of opiate, the evidence that he told Mrs MacConnell that her husband would now sleep is entirely consistent with him having done so. Alternatively, he might have given some other type of drug, such as Largactil.
In his evidence to the Inquiry, Professor Henry McQuay said that death would follow within a few minutes following a lethal intravenous injection of diamorphine. It is clear from the history that Shipman did not kill Mr MacConnell with a lethal intravenous injection of an opiate. He would have been dead by the time Mrs Pendlebury spoke to her mother on her arrival home. A lethal dose of opiate given intramuscularly would have caused death within about an hour. The period of time that elapsed between Shipman's visit and the death is unclear. It is Mrs Pendlebury's recollection that the doctor had called before 8.30pm but she is unable to say at what time her father died. It is possible that Mr MacConnell died within an hour of Shipman having administered some medication. If he did, it is possible that Shipman deliberately gave an excessive dose, intending it to hasten Mr MacConnell's end. It is also possible that rather more than an hour elapsed between the injection (if there was one) and the death, in which case, Shipman could not have directly caused the death.
A further possibility is that Shipman gave an injection of opiate which was not sufficient directly to cause Mr MacConnell's death. He might possibly have given a sedative such as Largactil. Either might have caused Mr MacConnell to go to sleep. Either type of drug might have been justified, if given in a suitable dose. However, for a patient such as Mr MacConnell, there are particular problems. Where a patient is suffering from breathing difficulties, only a modest dose of opiate or sedative may be sufficient to cause death. The doctor may face a difficult task in deciding whether to give the drug. He or she may realise that the drug will hasten death but, on the other hand, the doctor may think that something must be given to ease the patient's distress. Because Shipman killed so many patients, I am bound to suspect that he might have given an unjustifiable amount of opiate with the intention of shortening Mr MacConnell's life. However, it can be no more than suspicion.
In the light of all these uncertainties, I cannot reach any positive decision. I can say that, if Shipman did administer an excessive dose of any drug, I do not think he can have shortened Mr MacConnell's life by very long.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001