The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Kathleen McDonald
Introduction
Miss Kathleen McDonald (known as Katie) died at her home, 26 Carter Place, Hyde on Friday, 22nd
February 1985 at the age of 73. She was a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to arteriosclerosis.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Miss McDonald's nephew, Mr Thomas Seddon, and has had access to Shipman's visits book for the relevant period. No other documentation survives. As Shipman certified the cause of death, and as the Inquiry has recovered Shipman's books of counterfoils of Medical Certificates of Cause of Death (MCCDs), it would normally be expected that the MCCD counterfoil for this case would be available. However, the relevant book of counterfoils is in poor condition and several are missing. The medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss McDonald had never married, and at the time of her death she lived alone. She was security-conscious, and whenever her nephew visited her first floor flat he always found the door locked.
Mr Seddon cannot remember his aunt ever being ill and, in particular, cannot recall her ever attending a hospital. She was lively and enjoyed good health, but was forgetful and was probably suffering the early symptoms of Alzheimer's disease. She did her own shopping and housework. Mr Seddon last saw his aunt alive on the Saturday before she died, when she appeared to be her usual self.
The 1985 visits book records that Shipman was due to see Miss McDonald on 31st
January and 5th
February, but gives no indication as to the reason for those visits.
The Day of the Death
Some time during the late afternoon of 22nd
February 1985, Mr Seddon's wife received a telephone call from Miss McDonald's neighbour, Mrs Lucy Virgin, informing her that Miss McDonald had died. Mrs Virgin lived at 24 Carter Place, which was just across the landing from Miss McDonald's flat. She has since died. Mr Seddon and his wife immediately went to Miss McDonald's flat. There they met Mrs Virgin, who told them that it was lucky that Shipman had just been passing and that Miss McDonald had died in his arms. Mrs Virgin did not say anything else about the death.
Mrs Virgin let Mr Seddon and his wife into Miss McDonald's flat. Mr Seddon saw his aunt lying on her back on her bed. Her boots had been removed and this struck Mr Seddon as unusual, as he had never before seen her without her boots. She looked very thin and was staring up at the ceiling. Mr Seddon did not think of calling the police, as he assumed that Shipman had been present when his aunt died and had done all he could.
Mr Seddon later went to Shipman's surgery where he collected the MCCD. Shipman told Mr Seddon to go to Dukinfield Town Hall to register the death, but he did not mention that he had been present at the moment of death. As the MCCD has been lost and as there were no cremation documents, it is not possible to discover whether or not Shipman admitted that he had been present at the death.
There is no reference to Miss McDonald's name in Shipman's visits book for the day of the death. However, the book shows an intention to visit a patient who lived at 28 Carter Street, which is just round the corner from Carter Place. This was scheduled to be Shipman's ninth and last visit for the day.
Conclusion
The evidence of Mr Seddon suggests that his aunt enjoyed good health. The visits book reveals two visits by Shipman in the weeks leading up to her death, although the reasons for those visits are not known. They were not close together in time and it seems unlikely that Miss McDonald's state of health was such that her death was thought to be imminent. If anything, it appears that her death was sudden and unexpected.
There are real grounds for suspicion that Shipman might have been unlawfully involved in this death. Mrs Virgin told Mr Seddon that Shipman was present at the death and that he had been 'just passing'. It is not clear what was meant by 'just passing'. It is possible that Miss McDonald was suddenly taken ill and Shipman was summoned and was able to reach the flat very quickly because he was close by. On the other hand, it would be entirely typical of Shipman to make an unscheduled visit to a patient, kill him or her, and then tell relatives or neighbours that he had just called in, as he was passing, and had found the patient to be very ill and close to death. That Shipman was due to visit a patient who lived close by makes it rather more likely that he would make an unsolicited call on 22nd
February. If Shipman made an unsolicited call and Miss McDonald happened to die in the course of it, I would regard this death as extremely suspicious. A sudden fatal stroke is a rare event and the chances of such an event occurring by coincidence during a doctor's visit are very slight. Shipman claimed that such events occurred quite regularly but, as Dr Grenville says, it is extremely rare in the experience of other general practitioners.
My suspicions are heightened by the evidence that Miss McDonald was lying on her bed with her boots removed. Had she collapsed from a massive fatal stroke, she would not have had time or the chance to remove her boots. It would be unlikely that Shipman would remove them for her if he came to her aid. It is far more likely that she removed them before getting onto the bed, possibly at Shipman's request for the purpose of allowing him to take a blood sample or give an injection.
I am concerned, too, that this case was not referred to the coroner. If Shipman had not seen Miss McDonald since 5th
February, it is hard to see how he could have been justified in certifying the cause of death as a stroke.
Even though the evidence is very limited, such evidence as is available is so resonant of later suspicious deaths, in which far more evidence is available, that I have come to the conclusion that Shipman probably killed Miss McDonald. I cannot say that I am sure of that conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001