The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Hannah Helena Mottram
Introduction
Mrs Hannah Helena Mottram died at her home, 187 Talbot Road, Hyde on Sunday, 5th
August 1979 at the age of 69. She had been a patient of Shipman since he arrived in Hyde in 1977. She thought very highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed advertisements in a number of newspapers, publishing a list of cases in which the Inquiry had only limited information as to the circumstances of the death and in which no relatives had been traced. In response to that advertisement, Mrs Mottram's son, Mr Brian Mottram, contacted the Inquiry.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Brian Mottram, Mr Kenneth Mottram (Mr Brian Mottram's brother) and Mrs Brenda Mottram (Mr Kenneth Mottram's wife). The only surviving contemporaneous documentation is the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and Shipman's visits book for 1979. Mrs Mottram's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
At the time of her death, Mrs Mottram lived alone in her ground floor council flat. She suffered from angina. In general, this was relieved by glyceryl trinitrate but she had been admitted to hospital on account of angina on at least two occasions. It appears that she was otherwise fit and well. She was able to look after herself and did all her own washing, cooking and shopping. She walked into Hyde to shop but would sometimes take the bus home.
Mr Kenneth Mottram last saw his mother a few days before her death. He called on her and stayed for about half an hour. She seemed to be her usual self and did not complain of feeling ill.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of Sunday, 5th
August 1979, Mr Brian Mottram received a telephone call from one of his mother's neighbours to tell him that his mother was 'a bit off colour and not feeling so good'. Mr Brian Mottram went to his mother's flat and found her sitting in her usual chair. She was fully dressed and was talking and acting normally. She told him that she just felt 'off colour, a bit sickly and light-headed'. He could not see anything wrong with her. He telephoned for the doctor and was pleased to see that it was Shipman who came. Shipman said that he would have to examine Mrs Mottram in her bedroom. Mr Brian Mottram thinks that a neighbour accompanied his mother into her bedroom. He says that his mother walked into the bedroom unaided and that she had no difficulty in standing up from her chair, nor did she appear to be in pain. He says that he never spoke to her again. Mr Mottram cannot recall how long Shipman spent with his mother in her bedroom but, when he came out, he said that Mrs Mottram was 'very poorly' and that she had had a stroke. Shipman said that she was too ill to be admitted to hospital. Before leaving, Shipman said that he had given her an injection which would make her sleep and that she would either 'come out of it or not'. Mr Brian Mottram went into his mother's bedroom and found her sleeping. She was wearing nightclothes and was underneath the covers.
Mrs Brenda Mottram has a different recollection of the morning's events. She says that, at about 11am, she received a telephone call from her brother-in-law to say that Mrs Mottram was unwell. When she had found someone to look after her children, she went to her mother-in-law's flat. She found Mrs Mottram in bed, conscious and able to speak. Mrs Mottram said that she had been able to get up that morning and dress herself. Her breathing appeared normal. Mrs Brenda Mottram says that her brother-in-law told her that Shipman had been and had given Mrs Mottram an injection. Mrs Brenda Mottram says that she stayed in the bedroom and, although Mrs Mottram seemed drowsy, she was able to join in the conversation at times.
Mr Kenneth Mottram recalls that when he arrived home from work, some time between 2pm and 2.30pm, the person who was looking after his children told him that his mother was very ill. He went to his mother's flat and recalls that he found her lying in bed, looking poorly. He too describes her as drowsy. He stayed at the flat for about an hour before returning home with his wife to eat. His recollection is that, while they were at home, he received a telephone call from his brother, Mr Brian Mottram, to say that his mother's condition had deteriorated further. Mr Kenneth Mottram and his wife immediately returned to Mrs Mottram's flat. Mrs Mottram appeared to be sleeping and was paler than she had been. After about half an hour, Mrs Mottram stopped breathing.
Mr Brian Mottram and Mrs Brenda Mottram recall events differently. Their recollection is that, while they were still at Mrs Mottram's flat, Shipman
returned
and again examined Mrs Mottram in private. He said nothing about giving her an injection but said something like, 'I'm going off duty now, but with seeing your mother first I'd like to carry on, and if she gets worse, phone me'. He emphasised that Mr Brian Mottram was not to telephone another doctor and provided his home telephone number.
Mrs Brenda Mottram recalls that she and Mr Brian Mottram went back into the bedroom after Shipman had left. She says that Mrs Mottram was in the same condition as she had been before Shipman's arrival, that is, not fully conscious. She says that her husband then arrived and she went home to make tea for her children. She says that she went back to her mother-in-law's flat about an hour later and found her mother-in-law still alive but very ill. Her breathing was laboured. She recalls that both her husband and brother-in-law were with her in the bedroom when Mrs Mottram stopped breathing, and they realised that she had died.
Shipman was contacted and arrived a short time later. He told Mr Brian Mottram that his mother had had a stroke. He did not mention heart disease. Mr Kenneth Mottram recalls that, when he returned to certify Mrs Mottram's death, Shipman was very nice to the family. He was neither cold nor distant.
There is no reference to Mrs Mottram's name in Shipman's visits book for Sunday, 5th
August, although the book suggests that Shipman was on out of hours duty that weekend.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. The certificate itself has not survived but the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that Mrs Mottram had died of a coronary thrombosis, which was due to ischaemic heart disease. He said that he had last seen Mrs Mottram alive on the day of her death. He said that he had seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination.
Mrs Mottram was cremated but the documentation has not survived.
Conclusion
I regret to say that the truth about Mrs Mottram's death is unlikely ever to be known.
There is no evidence from which I can judge the seriousness of Mrs Mottram's underlying heart condition. Nor am I able to form a clear view of her condition on the day of her death. The relatives' description of Mrs Mottram's condition on 5th
August is not what I would have expected if she had had a heart attack. Nor indeed does it sound as though she had had a stroke. There is no evidence of slurred speech or weakness down one side. At Shipman's first visit, he gave an injection but we do not know what it was. Mrs Mottram then seems to have deteriorated gradually during the day. Her level of consciousness seems to have declined and eventually her breathing became laboured. Although the witnesses do not recall the time of death, it sounds as though Mrs Mottram died in the late afternoon or early evening.
It seems likely that Shipman visited twice during that day, once in the morning and again in the afternoon. I find it very strange that he should have advised that Mrs Mottram was 'too ill to go into hospital'. I regard that opinion as a contradiction in terms. Mrs Mottram was only 69. She had been leading an active life. If she had had a heart attack, she should have been admitted. I do not know and cannot guess what drug Shipman injected during his first visit. Whatever it was, it cannot have been a lethal injection of opiate, as Mrs Mottram lived for many hours afterwards. The relatives do not mention that Shipman left a prescription or that anyone went to a pharmacy that day. It is possible that Shipman gave an injection of opiate of an amount which was not lethal or of some sedative drug, such as Largactil. If he did, it would appear that the dose was not harmful, as there is some evidence that Mrs Mottram was able to join in a conversation for some time afterwards, although later on she was asleep.
We do not know what treatment, if any, Shipman gave at his second visit. Nor is there any clear evidence of the time of this visit, save that I have the distinct impression that Mrs Mottram lived for well over an hour after Shipman's second visit. If she did, she cannot have died as the result of a lethal injection of opiate. Professor Henry McQuay and Dr John Grenville agree that if a lethal injection of opiate is given intravenously it will cause death within a few minutes; if given intramuscularly, death will follow within about an hour.
I am puzzled by the evidence that Shipman appeared to be anxious to retain control over Mrs Mottram. He was the Donneybrook doctor on duty that weekend and, provided the family only sought the help of a general practitioner, Shipman would retain control of the certification of Mrs Mottram's death. It is possible that he was concerned that the family might call an ambulance, in which case he would lose control. The fact that Shipman said that Mrs Mottram was too ill to go to hospital also suggests that he was anxious to keep her treatment under his control. These factors give rise to some suspicion that Shipman might have caused Mrs Mottram's death.
Owing to the passage of time and the loss of the documentary records, I am unable to decide whether this death was natural or was due to an unlawful act on the part of Shipman.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001