The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Oscar Meredith
Introduction
Mr Oscar Meredith died at his home, 32 Hough Lane, Hyde on Tuesday, 13th
November 1984 at the age of 78. He had been a patient of Shipman since 1979, when he and his wife moved to Hyde. He thought highly of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was right-sided cerebrovascular accident.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr David Meredith, Mr Meredith's son, and has had access to the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and Shipman's visits book for 1984. Mr Meredith's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Meredith enjoyed good health for most of his life until about 1979 when he had a stroke. At that time, he was registered with a doctor in Dukinfield. Soon afterwards, Mr Meredith and his wife moved to Hyde and registered with Shipman. Mr Meredith did not make a full recovery from the stroke, which left him with little power of speech and weakness on the right side. Mr David Meredith recalls that his father's health deteriorated over the next five years. He took anti-coagulants and tablets for high blood pressure. Mr David Meredith recalls that, on one occasion, his father was given a dose of morphine for the relief of pain. It is not clear why he was in pain.
The Events of 12th
and 13th
November 1984
On Monday, 12th
November 1984, Mr David Meredith received a telephone call from his mother to say that his father was very unwell. He immediately went to his parents' house to find his father in bed, apparently in a great deal of pain. Mr David Meredith thought that his father had suffered another stroke.
Mr David Meredith recalls that, at about 2pm that day, Shipman came to the house. Mr David Meredith was not present in the room when Shipman examined his father. When Shipman came out of the room, he said that Mr Meredith was very ill and would probably die that day. He said he had given him something to 'make him more comfortable'. When Shipman had gone, Mr David Meredith sat with his father for about two hours. Mr Meredith was slipping in and out of consciousness and appeared to be still in pain.
The following day, Mrs Meredith telephoned her son to say that his father had died. He went to his parents' house. Shipman was not there and his mother gave him to understand that Shipman had not visited that day. Mr David Meredith does not know at what time his father died. Whilst at the house on 13th
November, Mr David Meredith noticed an empty phial of morphine in the bin. He thinks that Shipman had probably thrown the phial in the bin during his visit on 12th
November.
Mr Meredith's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for 13th
November.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman wrote that he had last seen Mr Meredith alive on the day of his death, although that is contrary to the understanding of Mr David Meredith. Shipman said that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination. The cause of death was certified to be right-sided cerebrovascular accident. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 13th
November 1984.
Conclusion
Mr Meredith had a history of stroke and was clearly very unwell before Shipman's arrival at the house at about 2pm on 12th
November. It is possible that he had had another stroke, even though pain is not usually a feature of such an event. It is also possible that Mr Meredith had some other illness, with painful symptoms, and that his son was either not aware of this or has forgotten about it. Shipman told Mr David Meredith that he had given his father something to make him more comfortable. In the light of Mr David Meredith's evidence about the empty phial of morphine, it seems likely that that was what Shipman gave on that day. If it was morphine, the dose cannot have been lethal, as Mr David Meredith lived for at least 12 hours and probably rather longer. A lethal dose of morphine would have killed within the hour. However, it is possible that Shipman gave a sub-lethal dose of morphine or a large dose of a sedative such as Largactil. If heavily sedated, Mr Meredith would be more vulnerable to bronchopneumonia, a common mechanism of death in elderly people. If Shipman did this, it would not be possible to say whether he had done it with the intention of keeping Mr Meredith comfortable or whether he used it as an indirect way of hastening his death.
What remains quite uncertain is what happened on 13th
November. It is not clear whether Shipman saw Mr Meredith alive on that day. He said that he did when completing the MCCD counterfoil. Mr Meredith's name was not in his visits book for that day but that is not conclusive either way. Mrs Meredith seems to have given her son the impression that Shipman had not visited that day. However, given the passage of time and the nature of the evidence, that does not seem conclusive either. There remains a real possibility, even a likelihood, that Shipman was at the house shortly before Mr Meredith's death.
Mr David Meredith says he found an empty phial of morphine on 13th
November and assumed it had been left on the previous day. However, it might well have been left that day and the contents might have been administered that day. I am afraid I do not know. If Shipman did give Mr Meredith an injection of morphine on that day, I am unable to say whether such a dose was justified. I do not know whether Mr Meredith was in pain. Nor do I know how large a dose it might have been or how soon before the death it was administered. It follows that I could not say whether such a dose, if given, had caused or hastened Mr Meredith's death.
I regret to say that I am unable to decide whether Shipman did or did not hasten Mr Meredith's death. If he did, I do not think he could have hastened the end by a significant period of time.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001