The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Cyril Mitchell
Introduction
Mr Cyril Mitchell died at his home, 5 Paignton Walk, Hyde on Monday, 4th
May 1981 at the age of 60. It is not known whether he was registered as a patient of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was coronary thrombosis.
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), as well as Shipman's visits book for 1981.
Despite extensive efforts on the part of the Inquiry, no witnesses or relatives have been traced and very little is known about the circumstances surrounding Mr Mitchell's death. Specifically, the informant in relation to his death, Mrs Margherita Elisabetta Maria Mitchell (Mr Mitchell's widow), has not been traced.
The Evidence
Mr Mitchell was a process worker who, it appears, lived with his wife. It is recorded on the death certificate that his wife was present at the death.
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself is not available, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that Mr Mitchell died of a coronary thrombosis on 4th
May 1981. He said that had last seen Mr Mitchell alive on 30th
April 1981, four days before his death. Mr Mitchell's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for 30th
April. However, it is entirely possible that Shipman had seen Mr Mitchell at his surgery on that day. Shipman also said that he had seen the body after death and that there would be no post-mortem examination. Mr Mitchell's name does not appear in the visits book for 4th
May but that does not mean that Shipman had not been to Mr Mitchell's house, either before or after the death. Shipman often did not enter requests for visits which were received after the end of morning surgery.
Conclusion
Nothing is known of Mr Mitchell's medical history or his state of health shortly before his death. I cannot say whether or not he was likely to suffer a fatal coronary thrombosis. Nor am I able to say whether or not the information recorded by Shipman on the counterfoil to the MCCD is correct. It is not known whether he visited Mr Mitchell on the day of his death. The lack of evidence makes it impossible to say whether this death was due to an unlawful act on the part of Shipman or whether it was a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001