The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Thomas Moult
Introduction
Mr Thomas Moult died at his home, 6 Thorpe Hall Grove, Hyde on Wednesday, 26th
June 1985 at the age of 70. He was probably a patient of Shipman, as Shipman certified the cause of his death and his name appears in Shipman's visits book for the day of his death. The certified cause of death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed advertisements in a number of newspapers, publishing a list of cases in which the Inquiry had only very limited information as to the circumstances of the death. No response was received in relation to Mr Moult. The Inquiry has traced Mrs Jane Smythe, the granddaughter of Mr Moult's brother, Mr William Moult. She has no knowledge as to the circumstances of Mr Thomas Moult's death. She has confirmed that there are no other members of the family who would be able to assist the Inquiry in determining the circumstances of his death.
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil and Shipman's visits book for 1985. Mr Moult's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the documents and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Nothing is known of Mr Moult's background beyond that which is recorded in his death certificate, where it is said that he was born in Hyde in 1915 and was a retired general labourer. His brother, Mr John Moult, was the informant in relation to his death.
Mr Moult's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book during the two month period preceding his death. From that, I infer that he was not suffering any prolonged illness of consequence.
The Day of the Death
Mr Moult's name appears in Shipman's visits book for Wednesday, 26th
June 1985, the day of his death. It is the fourth name in the list of visits. Four other names appear in the visits book for that day. Next to four of the names, Shipman has written a number, as he often did. The numbers appear to show the order in which Shipman intended to visit. The first name on the list has no number and refers to a female patient who appears to have had an episiotomy at Tameside General Hospital. It is unlikely that Shipman visited her. Of the four remaining patients, Mr Moult's name is the third in the list but has a number
'1'
against it, suggesting that he was to be the first visit of the day. That might suggest that he was in more urgent need of a visit than the others, but when the addresses are plotted on a map, the order in which Shipman intended to visit may well have been based on geographical convenience rather than clinical priority.
At the bottom of the list with a number
'3'
alongside appears
'2, Mona Street'
, the home of Mrs Mildred Robinson. She also died on that day and I have held that Shipman probably killed her in the late morning or at about lunchtime.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. Shipman certified that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. He said that chronic bronchitis had contributed to the death. Shipman said that he had last seen Mr Moult alive on the day of his death. He said that he had seen the body after death. There would not be a post-mortem examination.
On Mrs Mildred Robinson's MCCD counterfoil, Shipman stated that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis and that chronic bronchitis had contributed to the death. He said that he had last seen Mrs Robinson alive on the day of her death and that he had seen the body after death. In her case too there was to be no post-mortem examination.
Conclusion
Very little is known about the circumstances of Mr Moult's death. However, what is known gives rise to grave suspicion that Shipman may have killed him.
As nothing is known about Mr Moult's medical history, I must assume that what Shipman said on the MCCD is or might be true, namely that Mr Moult suffered from ischaemic heart disease and chronic bronchitis. Those conditions are not incompatible with the evidence that Shipman had not visited Mr Moult during the two months before his death.
The suspicion arises from the evidence relating to the day of the death. The fact that the death occurred on a day when Shipman visited is itself a cause for suspicion, especially as Mr Moult was obviously not terminally ill. It appears from the MCCD counterfoil that Mr Moult was still alive when Shipman visited him. That rules out the possibility that Mr Moult had been found dead and Shipman had been summoned to see the body. Shipman certified that Mr Moult died of a coronary thrombosis and that he saw the body after death. That suggests either that Shipman visited Mr Moult twice that day, once when he was alive and again after his death, or that the death occurred in Shipman's presence during his only visit. Either situation is possible but both are resonant of other cases in which Shipman has killed.
It is possible that, when Shipman was asked to visit Mr Moult that morning, Mr Moult was suffering from the symptoms of a heart attack, or perhaps angina. Such a request, if it sounded serious, would have been treated as an emergency. However, it seems that Mr Moult's request was not so treated. The surgery staff say that Shipman's usual procedure whenever an emergency arose was either for him to drop everything and go immediately or to instruct the staff to call an ambulance. Here, the position of Mr Moult's name in the visits book suggests that his name was written down by the receptionist in the ordinary way and that, when Shipman finished his surgery, which at this time was usually at about 11am, he decided on the order in which he would carry out his visits. That Mr Moult was given the first position might suggest that he was the most urgent but that is not necessarily so. Even if he were the most urgent, it does not seem likely that his condition gave rise to an emergency.
In my view, it is possible, although unlikely, that Mr Moult was having a heart attack when Shipman arrived. If that had happened, it would not be surprising, nor would it give rise to any suspicion, if Mr Moult died in Shipman's presence.
If Mr Moult was not having a heart attack when Shipman arrived, his subsequent death gives rise to grave suspicion that Shipman might have caused it. If Mr Moult died during Shipman's only visit and it was a non-emergency visit, the death during that short time would be a remarkable coincidence. Dr John Grenville says that such a coincidence might occur once in a general practitioner's lifetime. Shipman would have us believe that it happened quite frequently in his professional experience. I am satisfied that it did not and that almost all of the many deaths which occurred in Shipman's presence were almost certainly caused by him.
There is another possibility, which is that Shipman visited Mr Moult twice that day and that he saw the dead body on his second visit. If that were the case, it would not follow that the death had occurred in Shipman's presence. It would be possible that he had visited for the first time, treated Mr Moult and left him at home, presumably having decided that his condition, whatever it was, did not warrant hospital admission. Mr Moult could then have died and someone might have called Shipman out to see the body. However, I have found that many of Shipman's victims were killed during his first visit to a patient on a particular day, after which he would leave and wait until the body was found. Then he would return to see the body. Sometimes, he would return of his own volition and discover the body himself. It follows that the possibility that Shipman made two visits to Mr Moult on 26th
June does not necessarily reduce my suspicion that he might have killed him.
It is, of course, possible that Mr Moult died a natural death as the result of a coronary thrombosis. However, the fact that Shipman admitted that he had seen Mr Moult alive and seen the body after death on the same day persuades me that it is likely that Shipman killed Mr Moult. I would not reach that conclusion were it not for the fact that my consideration of other cases has led me to conclude that, by 1985, Shipman had already killed about 25 patients. The frequency with which he was killing was increasing. In reaching this decision, I have not relied on the fact that he also killed Mrs Mildred Robinson on that day, though the similarities are remarkable. Both were said to have died of a coronary thrombosis and both were said to have had chronic bronchitis as a contributory cause. Both had been seen before and after death on the same day. I reached my decision in Mrs Robinson's case before considering Mr Moult's. Despite the remarkable similarities, I do not think that I could properly say that the evidence that Shipman killed Mrs Robinson is probative in respect of Mr Moult.
My conclusion is that Shipman probably killed Mr Moult although I could not say that I am sure that he did.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001