The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Walter Mansfield
Introduction
Mr Walter Mansfield died at his daughter's home, 4 Marlborough Road, Hyde on Friday, 30th
March 1984 at the age of 83. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Mansfield's death was congestive heart failure.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Mansfield's daughter, Mrs Elizabeth Oldham, and has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1984 and the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Mr Mansfield's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Mansfield ran the Hare and Hounds public house on Werneth Low Road, Werneth Low from 1926 until his retirement in either 1982 or 1983. When he was 55 he was found to have diabetes, for which he took medication for the rest of his life. This medication was usually in oral form, although for a short time while he was still working he was given insulin injections. These were discontinued and he reverted to oral medication. He also took diuretic tablets. The diabetes did not affect his ability to run the public house. Mrs Oldham does not recall her father ever having any heart problems; nor does she recall him complaining of chest pain. About ten to twelve years before his death, Mr Mansfield had five toes amputated as they had become gangrenous. This suggests that his diabetes was quite severe and had affected his peripheral circulation. The loss of his toes affected Mr Mansfield's balance.
Mrs Oldham recalls that in the months leading up to her father's death, he remained fairly active for a person of his age. He was able to potter about the house without too much difficulty and enjoyed being taken out in the car. He could still walk a little out of doors with the aid of his walking stick. However, Mrs Oldham also recalls that her father would sometimes get 'the shivers' and, at times, would become breathless.
Mr Mansfield's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for 1984 for at least four weeks preceding the death. From that, I infer that his condition had been stable for some time.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Oldham says that on 30th
March 1984, her father was not feeling well and she telephoned the surgery to ask Shipman to visit. Mrs Oldham cannot now recall her father's symptoms, although it appears that they were not severe enough to keep Mr Mansfield in bed. Before Shipman arrived, Mr Bradley, an old friend of Mr Mansfield, called on him and the two men enjoyed a chat and a drink. Mr Bradley has since died.
Mr Bradley was still there when Shipman arrived at about lunchtime. He was carrying his black doctor's bag. Mr Mansfield went to sit on the bed and Shipman propped him up with pillows. After examining Mr Mansfield, Shipman gave him an injection, which Mrs Oldham thinks was in the arm, although she is not certain of this. Immediately after the injection, Mr Mansfield became unconscious. Shipman appeared worried and asked Mrs Oldham to fetch another bag from his car. She ran down to fetch it. The second bag was also black but was rectangular, rather like a briefcase. Mrs Oldham does not say that Shipman gave any further injection after the arrival of the second bag. Shipman said that Mr Mansfield had gone into cardiac arrest. Shipman told Mrs Oldham to help him by massaging her father's heart. Mrs Oldham cannot recall what Shipman was doing while she did that. However, she says that they did not move Mr Mansfield onto the floor. The resuscitation attempt took place while Mr Mansfield was still on the bed. After a while, Shipman took over the heart massage and appeared to apply much more force than Mrs Oldham had done. At some stage, Shipman put a white tube into her father's mouth. Mr Mansfield was still breathing. It appears that Shipman did not call an ambulance. After a while, Shipman said that he would send the district nurse to give Mr Mansfield an injection at 4pm and another at 7pm. He said that if anything should happen in the meantime, Mrs Oldham was to send for him and not to call any other doctor.
Mrs Oldham recalls that when Shipman left, her father was still breathing, although his eyes were closed. He appeared to be asleep. She recalls that his breathing gradually slowed down until it eventually stopped. She estimates that her father died about two hours after Shipman had first been in the house.
Soon after this, at about 4pm, the district nurse arrived. Mrs Oldham thinks that it was Nurse Dorothy Clegg. She told the nurse that she thought it was 'too late'. The nurse examined her father and confirmed that he had died. Mrs Oldham cannot remember Shipman returning to the house but it seems likely that he did. Nurse Clegg has told the Inquiry that, although she remembers Mr Mansfield as a person, she cannot recall going to his daughter's house on the day of the death. The district nursing records for 1984 are no longer available.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil is available. Shipman wrote that Mr Mansfield had died on 30th
March. He said that he had last seen him alive on the day of the death. He said that the cause of death was congestive heart failure and that bronchopneumonia and diabetes mellitus had contributed to the death. He said that he had seen the body after death and there would not be a post-mortem examination. The counterfoil is dated 30th
March 1984.
Mr Mansfield was cremated, but the documentation has not survived.
Conclusion
I regret that I am unable to reach any positive conclusion about the circumstances of this death.
I am unable to assess the seriousness of Mr Mansfield's medical condition on the day of his death. It is possible that he was suffering from heart failure. However, he does not appear to have been unwell during the preceding weeks. That he was able to entertain a visitor and was not confined to bed suggests that his condition was not critical.
It is not known what injection Shipman gave or whether the injection was given intravenously or intramuscularly. The injection caused Mr Mansfield to lose consciousness almost immediately. That leads me to suspect that the drug might have been an opiate, given intravenously. It cannot have been an opiate given intramuscularly, as Mr Mansfield became unconscious almost immediately. If the injection was of an opiate given intravenously, it cannot have been of a lethal dose as Mr Mansfield lived for an appreciable time afterwards. However, it is possible that Shipman gave a sublethal dose, which was sufficient to make him unconscious and to depress his respiration so that he suffered brain damage due to the insufficiency of the oxygen supply to the brain. He could in those circumstances have survived for an hour or two, or longer. In 1979, Mrs Alice Maude Gorton lived for two days following a sublethal dose of opiate. In 1994, Mrs Renate Overton lived for 14 months after Shipman injected her with opiate. All three of these patients were quite heavy and it is possible that Shipman had underestimated the amount needed to have a lethal effect.
This theory could fit the facts but would mean that Shipman was prepared to give a lethal or near-lethal injection of opiate in the presence of Mr Mansfield's daughter and possibly Mr Mansfield's friend, Mr Bradley. To do this would seem to be utterly foolhardy. In general, Shipman gave lethal injections when he was alone with the patient. If Shipman did give an injection of opiate with the intention to kill, his efforts at resuscitation must have been a sham. This is not impossible. I have come across at least two cases where he made a show of attempting to resuscitate a patient to whom he had given an opiate. However, I still think it unlikely that he would have deliberately tried to kill Mr Mansfield in the circumstances which prevailed here.
I have considered what other drug Shipman might have given. He cannot have given a strong diuretic. That would have been appropriate treatment for congestive heart failure, the condition which Shipman was to give as the cause of death. However, a diuretic would not have caused Mr Mansfield to lose consciousness. It is possible that Shipman gave aminophylline or terbutaline. As Dr John Grenville explained when giving evidence in the case of Mrs Hannah Jones, these drugs were widely used in the 1980s when treating asthma. Aminophylline carries some risk of causing cardiac arrest. That is a possible explanation for events. However, if that is what happened and if Shipman had given the injection in good faith, I would have expected him to call an ambulance as soon as Mr Mansfield became unconscious. The cardiac complication is a known side effect. The equipment available on an ambulance, let alone the facilities of a hospital, might have saved Mr Mansfield's life. Instead, Shipman appears to have decided that nothing more should be done and he departed, leaving Mr Mansfield in the care of his daughter. He also advised her that 'if anything happened' she should call him rather than any other doctor. That suggests that he might not have wished his actions to come to the attention of a professional colleague.
I am puzzled by this case. If Mrs Oldham's account is accurate, it gives rise to suspicion that Shipman killed Mr Mansfield. However, there are so many uncertainties that I feel unable to reach a decision.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001