The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Cissie Macfarlane
Introduction
Mrs Cissie Macfarlane died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Tuesday, 29th
February 1972 at the age of 57. She had been admitted to PGI on 24th
February 1972. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was renal failure due to chronic pyelonephritis. At the time of Mrs Macfarlane’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken statements from two of Mrs Macfarlane’s daughters, Mrs Jean Steward and Mrs Sheila Godfrey. Statements have also been taken from Mrs Kathleen Naylor and Mrs Margaret Calvert, who were respectively the ward sister on Ward 1 and a part-time night sister at the hospital. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Macfarlane’s hospital records. Mrs Macfarlane was buried so there are no cremation certificates. No post-mortem examination was performed. Professor Richard Baker has considered and commented on the available evidence.
Mrs Steward has expressed concerns about the circumstances of her mother’s death. She thinks that Shipman might have shortened her life by administering an injection to her on the night before she died. To some extent, Mrs Godfrey shares her sister’s concerns.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mrs Macfarlane was married and had five children. At the time of her death, her children had all left home and she and her husband lived alone. Mrs Steward was 27 and lived in Lincolnshire. Mrs Godfrey was 29 and lived locally.
Mrs Macfarlane suffered from arthritis. She did not often attend her general practitioner (GP) and did not take medication prescribed by him. Instead, she took Beechams Powders. Dr Aneez Esmail, Medical Advisor to the Inquiry, has advised me that these could be very effective in the relief of pain but that their long-term use might well have damaged Mrs Macfarlane’s kidneys. Mrs Steward does not think that Mrs Macfarlane had ever been admitted to hospital until shortly before her death. She recalls that, in either January or February 1972, her mother underwent some investigations at PGI. That is confirmed by the medical records.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
It appears that Mrs Macfarlane became unwell during the few weeks before she died. She was not eating or sleeping properly. She suffered from increasing anxiety and panic attacks. Her GP was visiting her every couple of days. Mr Macfarlane took time off work to care for her.
Mrs Steward went to Pontefract to stay with her parents for the weekend before Mrs Macfarlane was admitted to PGI. Following her return to Lincolnshire, she discussed her mother’s condition with a doctor and then decided that she should return to Pontefract to look after her.
On Thursday, 24th
February, Mrs Steward and her family travelled to Pontefract. When they arrived at her parents’ house, at about 9.15pm, there was no one in. A neighbour told them that Mrs Macfarlane had been taken to hospital by ambulance and that Mr Macfarlane had gone with her. When Mr Macfarlane returned home later that evening, he explained that, earlier in the day, Mrs Macfarlane had developed breathing difficulties. He had been worried about her and had called for help. It seems from Mrs Macfarlane’s medical records that it was her GP who arranged for her to be admitted to PGI. The referral letter mentioned anaemia.
The medical notes for 24th
February were not written by Shipman. There is a detailed admission note which makes it clear that Mrs Macfarlane had significant problems. Her ankles were swollen, she was breathless, pale and sweaty and looked anaemic. Her blood pressure was high at 230/140. There were widespread noises in the chest. Her legs were swollen up to the knees. The potential diagnoses included chronic renal disease and bronchopneumonia. She was given appropriate treatment.
In-Patient Treatment
Mrs Steward visited her mother in hospital on the morning of Friday, 25th
February 1972. It was not visiting time but Mrs Steward and her family were allowed into the ward for a few minutes. They found Mrs Macfarlane sitting up in bed chatting with the other female patients. Mrs Steward says that a nurse told her that Mrs Macfarlane was
‘as bright as a button’
.
Mrs Steward recalls that her sister and father also visited later that day. When Mr Macfarlane returned home that evening, he said that he had some bad news. He said that a doctor had told them that Mrs Macfarlane had a
‘big problem with her kidneys’
and that Mrs Godfrey had fainted at the news. Mrs Steward thinks that her mother might have been moved to a
‘side room’
at that point. As I have explained in
Chapter Two
, the evidence suggests that patients were often moved to one of the side rooms or cubicles on the ward when they were seriously ill or near to death.
Mrs Godfrey has said in her statement that she visited her mother at PGI on three occasions. She recalls that the visit at which she was told that Mrs Macfarlane’s kidneys were failing occurred about three or four days after her admission. Mrs Godfrey was told that there was nothing that could be done for her mother. She was shocked at the news and fainted.
The hospital records for 25th
February show that Mrs Macfarlane was given a blood transfusion beginning at 8pm. The nursing records for that day suggest that her condition was poor. The afternoon entry for that day records:
‘Very poor day. Breathless, O2
(
oxygen
)
given
+ aminophylline suppos
(
suppository
)
Ti 3pm.
Commenced steroids. ? for blood transfusion,
very poorly.’
Mrs Steward recalls visiting her mother on Saturday, 26th
February. She was in her own room. A nurse told Mrs Steward that they were preparing Mrs Macfarlane for a blood transfusion; I think this conversation probably took place on 25th
February. She recalls that her mother was very pale. She had had a disturbed night. Mrs Macfarlane asked Mrs Steward to stay with her. That evening, Mrs Steward slept in her mother’s room in an easy chair. There is no medical record for 26th
February or indeed for either of the following two days. However, the nursing records for 26th
February confirm that a blood transfusion was still being given that afternoon and that Mrs Macfarlane’s condition remained poor, though with some slight improvement. One entry for that day records:
‘Still very poorly and breathless, not complained. Daughter present all night.’
Mrs Steward stayed with Mrs Macfarlane at PGI throughout the weekend and until her death on Tuesday, 29th
February. She recalls that her mother had improved after the blood transfusion. Mrs Steward recalls that her mother was
‘perky’
at times, particularly on the Monday, when she received a number of visitors. However, the nursing records for 27th
February suggest that Mrs Macfarlane’s condition had deteriorated by that day. She was breathless and restless and was being sedated and was still being given blood. The first entry for that day records:
‘Patient gravely ill. Daughter present all night.
Pt. c/o headaches, no j.v. pressure
(
jugular venous pressure
)
raised.
5 mgms Valium at 11pm IM
(
intramuscular injection
)
IV running satis.
2 pt. blood finished at 11. Normal saline comm.
on Dr’s orders till 5AM, then to have 3rd
pint
of blood. Very restless night extremely breathless.
IM aminophyline
(
sic
)
250 mgms given at 3AM with slight effect. Very frightened and anxious.
condition seems to be deteriorating.
N.P.U.
(
not passed urine
)
all night.’
As this is the first of two notes made on 27th
February, it seems likely that the intramuscular injection of Valium had been given at 11pm on 26th
February. The blood transfusion was running satisfactorily, although it was discontinued later that day. Mrs Steward has seen the entries in the nursing records and has said that the description of her mother’s condition as
‘gravely ill’
does not accord with her recollection. She recalls that her mother was
‘very with it’
.
The Day before the Death
Mrs Steward remembers that, on Monday, 28th
February, her mother was moved to a larger side room. She was receiving oxygen via tubes in her nose. Mrs Godfrey thinks that she visited her mother that day. She recalls that her mother
‘looked terrible’
. She looked as though she was in agony and her face was a yellowish colour. She was having trouble breathing. Mrs Godfrey remembers that, at some point during the visit, her mother grasped her wrist and said words to the effect,
‘You have got to get me out of here, Sheila.’
When Mrs Godfrey asked why, her mother said,
‘They are killing me, they are killing me.’
Mrs Steward does not remember her mother ever saying anything of this kind.
Mrs Steward and Mr Macfarlane again stayed at the hospital on the Monday evening and night. Once her other visitors had left, Mrs Macfarlane started drifting in and out of sleep. Her mouth was dry and Mrs Steward fetched some gauze and ice-cubes from a nurse. The nurse said that the doctor would be coming to see Mrs Macfarlane.
At about 9.30pm or 9.45pm on Monday, 28th
February, a doctor, whom Mrs Steward now believes to have been Shipman, came into the room, accompanied by the nurse to whom Mrs Steward had spoken a short time earlier. Mr Macfarlane was asleep in the chair. Mrs Macfarlane was awake and was sucking ice-cubes. The doctor asked Mrs Steward what she was doing. Mrs Steward explained that she was trying to give her mother a drink. The doctor then kicked Mr Macfarlane’s chair and asked who he was. Mrs Steward explained that he was Mrs Macfarlane’s husband, whereupon the doctor went over to the oxygen controls on the wall behind Mrs Macfarlane’s bed. He touched the dial but Mrs Steward is not sure whether or not he actually turned it. He then said,
‘You might as well turn this off, you’re just prolonging the agony.’
He was very uncaring and rude. He then said,
‘I’ll be back’
and left the room. The doctor returned after about five or ten minutes, carrying a kidney bowl containing a syringe. He told Mrs Steward to leave the room. He gestured to Mr Macfarlane who was still asleep in the chair and said
‘he won’t be any trouble’
. Mr Macfarlane stayed in the room. Mrs Steward left the room and closed the door behind her. Mrs Steward is sure that the nurse remained in the room with the doctor.
After about four or five minutes, the doctor and the nurse came out of the room, carrying the bowl and syringe. They walked past Mrs Steward without saying anything. Mrs Steward went back into the room. She says that her mother pointed to the tubes in her nose and then pointed to the controls on the wall. Mrs Steward recalls looking at the controls and realising that someone had turned the two dials to the ‘off’ position. She says that she turned them both back on. Mrs Macfarlane looked very drowsy and went to sleep. Mrs Steward does not think that her mother awoke again.
Mrs Steward remained at her mother’s bedside until the next morning. The same nurse came into the room on a few occasions during the night to attend to Mrs Macfarlane’s catheter. Mrs Steward told the nurse that she did not think much of the doctor’s bedside manner. The nurse said that he was only a junior doctor and was very overworked. She added that the nurses were also overworked and that it was a very busy hospital.
There is no entry in the medical records relating to 28th
February but three entries were made in the nursing records. The first entry is as follows:
‘Still extremely ill, breathless ++
oxygen via nasal catheter. Visitors
present throughout the night. All
nursing care given. All treatment continued.
Incontinent of urine.’
The second entry is as follows:
‘All care. No change in general
condition. O2
(
oxygen
)
continued + treatment.
Remains very ill. Relatives present’
After the second entry for 28th
February, there is then a separate entry, signed by Mrs Naylor, which records,
‘40 mgs Valium given to settle’
. There is no reference in the note to how the Valium was administered. It is not known whether Valium was also administered on 27th
February and if so in what dose. The dose recorded as having been given on 28th
February was eight times that recorded on 26th
February.
Mrs Naylor told the Inquiry that she had no recollection of Mrs Macfarlane but confirmed that she made the entry in the nursing notes recording that 40mg of Valium had been administered. She observed that the note was very brief and that it did not say what time the drug was given, who ordered the drug to be given, how it was administered or by whom it was administered. She thought that she must have made a more detailed note on the medicine chart, which, unfortunately, is no longer available.
Mrs Naylor said that Valium would be given to a patient only if prescribed by a doctor. If the drug was to be given orally or by intramuscular injection, it would be administered by a nurse. If it was to be given intravenously, it would be administered by a doctor. She said that the dose of 40mg sounded to her very high but she cannot say why such a high dose was given. If she had been told by a doctor that the appropriate dose was 40mg, she would not have questioned it. Since the administration of it was noted in the nursing records and since (as I shall explain) it was given intramuscularly, I believe it was given by Mrs Naylor and not by Shipman.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Steward recalls that her father woke at about 6.30am and asked how Mrs Macfarlane was. Mrs Steward told her father that his wife had had a good night’s sleep and that he should go home and come back later in the day. He agreed and left about 15 minutes later. Mrs Macfarlane was still asleep. Mrs Steward washed her mother’s face and hands. Her breathing was shallow, as it had been for most of the night.
The final entry in the nursing records, which was made on the day of the death, reads as follows:
‘Sleeping most of the night, condition remains very poor. Relatives present throughout the night. N.P.U.’
At about 9am, Mrs Macfarlane made what Mrs Steward describes as
‘a gurgling sound’
from her throat. She then gave a big sigh and died. Mrs Steward went to fetch a nurse who confirmed that Mrs Macfarlane had died. Mrs Steward was left alone with her mother for ten minutes. The nurse then asked her to sit in the day room and said that the doctor would certify the death. The nurse told her that Mrs Macfarlane’s kidneys had failed. Shipman made an entry in the medical notes that Mrs Macfarlane had died at 9.10am. He had made a complete examination of her body and had confirmed that the cause of death was renal failure, of which the cause was not known. Mrs Steward did not see the doctor who came that morning (Shipman) and cannot say whether it was the same doctor as the one who had attended the previous night. It seems very likely that it was.
Medical Evidence
Professor Baker reviewed the available evidence in this case, including Mrs Macfarlane’s hospital records. He summarised the medical and nursing records as follows:
‘
(
Mrs Macfarlane
)
was referred by her general practitioner to a consultant surgeon because of right-sided abdominal pain and haematuria. Outpatient investigations indicated severe kidney problems, including failure to pass contrast media at IVP, raised ESR and urea, and some anaemia. Approximately two weeks after first being seen in outpatients, an admission was arranged.
The patient was admitted on 24.02.1972. The initial notes in the records are not signed, but they do indicate that the patient had significant problems. These included rapid onset of symptoms, which had become progressively worse. Her ankles were swollen, the patient was breathless, pale, sweaty and she looked anaemic. Her blood pressure was high (230/140). There were widespread inspiratory and expiratory noises in the chest. The jugular venous pressure was raised. She had oedema to the knees. Initial treatment included ampicillin, oxygen, intramuscular frusemide, and intravenous aminophylline. The initial potential diagnoses included chronic renal disease, possibly haemolytic uraemic syndrome, and bronchopneumonia.
Subsequent treatment included transfusion of two units of blood on the 25/02/1972.
No further entries were made in the medical records until 29/02/1972, when Shipman recorded the patient as dead at 9.10am, giving the cause of death as renal failure, cause not known. As far as I can determine, Shipman had not made an entry in the medical record prior to that date. No information about clinical management and clinical course between the dates of the 25/02/1972 and 29/02/1972 is contained in the medical records.
The nursing records indicate that Mrs Macfarlane continued to receive aminophylline supplemented by steroids. She remained very ill, and it certainly appears as though the relatives were aware of this since her daughter stayed overnight on the 26th
and 27th
of February. On the 27th
February, the nursing notes state that the patient was gravely ill and seemed to be deteriorating.’
Professor Baker considered the statement of Mrs Steward and her account that a doctor, who she now thinks was Shipman, attended her mother on the evening before she died and gave her an injection. Professor Baker noted the entry in the nursing records that 40mg Valium was administered
‘to settle’
Mrs Macfarlane. He expressed the view that the entry in the nursing notes of 27th
February (which I have set out above), recording that 5mg Valium had been administered, was likely to relate to the administration of the drug on the evening of 26th
February. He noted that there is no record of the administration of Valium on the evening of 27th
February, but considered it possible that Valium was administered and recorded on the drug chart, rather than in the nursing notes. He speculated that, if Valium was given on 27th
February, a higher dose might have been appropriate than the 5mg given the day before.
Professor Baker observed that Mrs Macfarlane clearly had significant renal problems, which caused her to suffer from distressing symptoms, particularly breathlessness. He concluded that it would have been appropriate to give her medication to reduce her distress and that, at that time, diazepam (Valium) would probably have been regarded as reasonable treatment. He said that the initial popularity of diazepam was to a large extent due to its relative safety when taken by mouth in overdose, in comparison with the barbiturate tranquillisers. However, he noted that Valium could cause respiratory depression, particularly when administered intravenously. He referred to recent guidance in the British National Formulary (BNF), which recommends a dose of 10-20mg by intravenous injection over two to four minutes as sedative cover for minor surgical or medical procedures. The oral dose for management of anxiety is given as 2mg, three times daily, increased if necessary to 15-30mg daily in divided doses. If given by intramuscular injection for severe anxiety or control of alcohol withdrawal, the recommended dose is 10mg, repeated if necessary after not less than four hours. Professor Baker concluded that the dose of 40mg of Valium was unusually high, although a dose of 40mg in a reasonably healthy adult would not be expected to cause death.
Professor Baker then considered the possible routes of administration. First, he said that, if 40mg had been given intravenously, it could well have stopped Mrs Macfarlane’s breathing, and death would have occurred within a few minutes. He noted Mrs Steward’s account that, when she returned to the room, Mrs Macfarlane was sufficiently alert to be able to point to the oxygen tubes and controls. On that basis, he concluded that it was very unlikely that the Valium had been given intravenously. He said that, if the dose had been given intramuscularly, Mrs Macfarlane would have lost consciousness over a prolonged period, which was consistent with Mrs Steward’s observations. He thought it most likely that the drug had been given by intramuscular injection, which was the route used on the evening of 26th
February. He said that, for a patient who was severely ill, as Mrs Macfarlane was, a prolonged period of unconsciousness would increase the risk of death due to bronchopneumonia or venous thrombosis. He said that the dose of 40mg might have been sufficient to be fatal in view of Mrs Macfarlane’s condition.
Professor Baker thought that it was possible that Shipman had decided to give a large dose of diazepam in order to kill Mrs Macfarlane rather than to relieve her distress. On the other hand, it was possible that the dose was given in good faith, in order to ensure that she had a good night’s rest. He said that it was possible that a gradual increase in dose over three days had led to a dose of 40mg being reached, but that the use of such a high dose was unusual and carried serious risks. He also mentioned the possibility that Shipman had administered a different drug, which was not recorded in the records, for example pethidine or diamorphine, which would have produced the same sequence of events.
Other Evidence
There is some evidence that Shipman considered that 40mg Valium was appropriate treatment, at least in some circumstances. Mrs Calvert told the Inquiry that, at some point during Shipman’s time at PGI, she saw him giving a 40mg dose of Valium to a patient in the accident and emergency department. The patient had been involved in a road traffic accident and had sustained a bad laceration to her leg. After Shipman had administered 30mg Valium, Mrs Calvert tried to warn him that he was giving too much but he asked for another 10mg ampoule, which he administered to the patient. Although the patient did not show any signs of having been harmed by the high dose, Mrs Calvert thought at the time that the incident showed that Shipman was over-confident.
Conclusion
There can be no doubt that Mrs Macfarlane was very seriously ill at the time of her admission to hospital and that it was inevitable that she would die quite soon. It is quite likely that her death was entirely natural and unaffected by any treatment given.
The second point that must be made is that there can be no certainty that the doctor who prescribed Valium and who was present when Mrs Macfarlane was given an injection of Valium on the night before her death was in fact Shipman. I appreciate that Mrs Steward feels confident that it was he but she met the doctor only once. I accept entirely that it could have been he and would go as far as to say that it very probably was he, but I cannot be sure of it.
Mrs Macfarlane was given 40mg Valium at a time when she was very poorly and her respiratory and renal functions were severely compromised. I think it highly likely that the injection was given intramuscularly by Mrs Naylor, on Shipman’s instruction; if it had been given intravenously, Mrs Macfarlane would have died within a few minutes. Even if given intramuscularly, 40mg is a very large dose to give and, for a patient in Mrs Macfarlane’s condition, would expose the patient to the risk of death. It is entirely possible that Shipman acted in bad faith, with the intention that Mrs Macfarlane’s death would be accelerated. It is also quite possible that he acted as he did, being reckless as to whether or not the prescribed dose would accelerate Mrs MacFarlane’s death. It is far less likely that Shipman acted in good faith, believing that that amount was appropriate and necessary to relieve distress; the dose was very large and Mrs Macfarlane was very poorly. This is one of the cases that I regard as entailing potentially dangerous treatment that directly caused or hastened the death of the patient but in which I cannot say whether Shipman acted deliberately, recklessly or in good faith. This causes me to have some suspicion about it.
I very much regret that I have had to raise these doubts so many years after the death and I am sorry for the distress this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI, once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001