The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Clare Louise Matthews
Introduction
Clare Louise Matthews died at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Tuesday, 29th
May 1973. She was 26 days old. She had been admitted to PGI, probably to Hydes Medical Ward, about a week before she died. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was cerebral haemorrhage resulting from deformity of the head during delivery. Shipman identified meningitis as a contributory cause of the death. At the time of Clare’s death, Shipman was a registrar in paediatrics.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Clare’s mother, Mrs Ann Dunn, and from Mr Bertram Matthews, who is Mrs Dunn’s father and Clare’s grandfather. Statements were also taken from Dr Peter McWilliam and Mrs Valeria White, who were respectively a clinical assistant in paediatrics at PGI and a nursing sister on Hydes Medical Ward at the time of Clare’s death. Clare’s hospital records are no longer available. Her body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. A post-mortem examination was carried out on Clare’s body. The post-mortem report is no longer available but some details of the examination are recorded in the PGI mortuary post-mortem book, which has been made available to the Inquiry.
Mrs Dunn was not suspicious about Clare’s death at the time but, understandably, she is now concerned, knowing of Shipman’s involvement in Clare’s treatment and in the certification process.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers.
Personal Background
Mrs Dunn was 25 at the time of Clare’s death. She had a normal pregnancy but labour was prolonged and delivery of the baby was extremely difficult. In the end, delivery was effected with the aid of ventouse extraction and forceps. There was a swelling on the crown of Clare’s head although it seems that this had subsided by the time of her discharge from hospital, when she was a few days old. At home, Clare was feeding and progressing well. There were no concerns about her health until the need arose for her to be admitted to hospital.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
Mr Matthews is now over 90 years of age and he accepts that his memory is not as good as it was. He remembers that he was holding his granddaughter when she had what he thought was a fit. Mrs Dunn remembers that one of Clare’s arms went very tight and rigid and that her eyes were rolling. The general practitioner was called out and he thought that Clare had meningitis. The swelling on the crown of her head had reappeared. An ambulance was called and Clare was taken to PGI. Clare’s mother recollects that, at PGI, Clare was taken into the intensive care unit. In fact, there was no such unit at that time but cubicles off the main ward were used to treat babies and children who were seriously ill. I think Clare must have been treated in one of those cubicles. She was given a lumbar puncture which confirmed that she was suffering from meningitis and this was treated with intravenous antibiotics. Mrs Dunn recalls that there was a tube attached to Clare’s head which was probably used for the administration of the antibiotics.
Mrs Dunn remembers that Clare was making a good recovery from meningitis when she suffered what Mrs Dunn understood was an intestinal blockage. Clare underwent an operation and again it seemed to Mrs Dunn that she made a good recovery.
At some stage, Mrs Dunn had a conversation with a doctor and this conversation has stuck in her mind. The doctor asked if she knew what the consequences of the meningitis might be for Clare. He said that Clare might suffer from a long-term disability. Mrs Dunn felt that this was unsympathetic; her main feeling at that time was of relief that her daughter had survived two life-threatening illnesses.
Mrs Dunn visited Clare in hospital every afternoon and last saw her on the day before her death. On the morning of the day of the death, the family received a telephone call from the hospital to say that Clare had taken a turn for the worse. Clare’s mother and grandfather went to the hospital, but, by the time they arrived, Clare had already died. Mrs Dunn remembers that a nurse told her that she had been giving Clare her bottle feed when she had turned blue and died in the nurse’s arms. Cremation Form B suggests that Clare died at about 11.50am and Mrs Dunn thinks that that
‘sounds about right’
.
Mrs Dunn was naturally extremely upset after Clare’s death. She remembers that one of the nurses was also very upset and she believes that this was the nurse who had been feeding Clare when she died. At the time, Mrs Dunn was not at all suspicious about the death because she accepted that deaths can occur suddenly.
Certification
Shipman completed cremation Form B. He wrote that Clare had died at 11.50am and that he had attended her during her last illness for nine days. He said that he last saw her alive on the day of her death, that he saw her body immediately after her death and that he carried out a complete examination of her body. The cause of death was the same as appeared on the death certificate and is what he must have written on the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death. He said that the mode of death was a coma lasting 24 to 36 hours. Shipman confirmed that Clare had undergone a laparotomy; this will have been the operation to clear the intestinal blockage. He wrote that she was being nursed by Sister White during her last illness but, as Mrs White points out, this may well simply mean that she was in charge of the nursing on the ward at the time. Mrs White does not remember Clare. Shipman said that he was present at the moment of death and mentioned no one else as having been present. He said that a post-mortem examination had been requested. Dr McWilliam told the Inquiry that the stated causes of death made sense to him.
Dr H C Nirula, who filled in cremation Form C, has not been traced. He claimed on Form C to have spoken to Shipman but did not claim to have spoken to any other medical practitioners or to the nursing staff or Clare’s relatives. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of this Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Shipman’s statement that Clare had been in a coma for 24 to 36 hours before her death causes Mrs Dunn some concern. It is not consistent with her own clear recollection of Clare’s condition prior to her death and, in particular, with her recollection that she was told that Clare was being fed shortly before she died. These matters, combined with the knowledge that Shipman was involved in Clare’s treatment and the certification of her death, have caused Mrs Dunn to feel concerned that he might have played some sinister role in the death.
Post-Mortem Examination
The PGI mortuary post-mortem book confirms that the late Dr Oliver Troughton, a consultant paediatrician, referred Clare for post-mortem examination. The entry in the book confirms that cerebral haemorrhage was the cause of the death.
Medical Evidence
I have discussed this case with Dr Aneez Esmail, Medical Advisor to the Inquiry. He thinks that the circumstances of Clare’s birth were unlikely to have been related to her death. He says that, if Clare’s head had been significantly damaged during delivery, she would have been obviously ill; she would not have been allowed home and she would not have been feeding well and progressing normally. In Dr Esmail’s view, the cause of Clare’s death was a cerebral haemorrhage due to meningitis. He says that Mrs Dunn’s description of the onset of meningitis is very clear and the diagnosis was obviously right. The reappearance of the swelling of the head observed by Mrs Dunn would have been due to the swelling of the brain as a result of the meningitis. At that age, a baby’s skull has not yet closed and any swelling of the brain would produce a visible effect. Dr Esmail also thinks that the intestinal blockage would have been a further effect of the meningitis. It is likely that part of the intestine became badly infected and had to be removed. If so, Dr Esmail says, it is unlikely that Clare was being fed by mouth so soon after the operation; it is, however, a possibility. Dr Esmail says that he can well understand that the doctor who spoke to Mrs Dunn would be anxious to warn her that there was a real danger that Clare might have suffered permanent brain damage as a result of the meningitis. Indeed, it is possible that the doctors believed that such damage had occurred. Dr Esmail says that it is possible that, although Clare appeared to be conscious and awake on the day before she died, the doctors may have been aware that her level of consciousness was depressed. That may be why a doctor tried to warn Mrs Dunn about the future and it might also explain why Shipman wrote that Clare had been in a coma for 24 to 36 hours before death. Dr Esmail also says that Clare was at serious risk of suffering a brain haemorrhage. In short, Clare’s outlook was very bleak. Finally, Dr Esmail says that the description given to Mrs Dunn of the sudden death, and of the blue appearance of Clare’s face, is consistent with a catastrophic brain haemorrhage. This could not have been caused by the administration of a drug by Shipman.
Conclusion
There is an abundance of evidence to suggest that Clare’s death resulted from natural causes. Clare became extremely ill with meningitis when she was between two and three weeks old. Although it appeared that she was treated successfully for that, her condition remained poor and she went on to suffer an intestinal blockage. Such illnesses would be worrying in the case of an adult but they would be that much more serious in the case of a young baby. Clare was at severe risk of cerebral haemorrhage. Mrs Dunn’s recollection is that she was told that Clare had died whilst she was being fed by a nurse (quite possibly a junior nurse rather than Sister White) and she observed a nurse crying on the ward when she arrived there. The hospital ordered a post-mortem examination, the result of which definitely indicated that the cause of death was cerebral haemorrhage, and the description of Clare’s sudden death is, as I have explained, consistent with that cause.
It is understandable that Mrs Dunn should be concerned now that she knows that Shipman was involved in Clare’s treatment and certified the cause of her death. However, in my view, there is no real cause for concern about Shipman’s involvement. I have explained that Dr Esmail thinks it unlikely that the nurse who was holding Clare was actually feeding her at the time. Mrs Dunn remembers otherwise. I cannot resolve this conflict but it does not alter my view about the cause of death.
To my mind, the only possible remaining cause for concern is that Shipman stated that he was present at the death and implied that no other person was present. Why Shipman should have said that, I cannot imagine. However, it is most unlikely and it is inconsistent with Mrs Dunn’s recollection. It is likely that a baby as seriously ill as Clare would be under almost constant supervision by the nursing staff. If Clare became suddenly worse, there would have been an emergency and the most senior medical and nursing staff available would have attended to her. I cannot explain why Shipman wrote that on Form B but, in this case, it does not suggest to me that he had done anything to harm Clare.
If Dr Esmail’s explanation for Clare’s death is correct - and I believe that it probably is - it means that the causes of death given by Shipman are not strictly correct. The primary cause - cerebral haemorrhage - is correct but the underlying causes are not correctly stated. This is of no great importance.
This is a tragic case and I greatly regret that the Inquiry has reopened Mrs Dunn’s sad memories. However, I hope that she will now feel reassured that Clare’s death was completely natural.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001