The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Bernadette McCourt
Introduction
Bernadette McCourt died at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI), on Friday, 7th
January 1972 at the age of two days. It seems likely that her mother was admitted to Ward 3 (the gynaecology ward), shortly before Bernadette’s delivery, and that Bernadette was nursed either on that ward or, which is more likely, on Hydes Medical Ward (one of the paediatric wards). She never left PGI. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was prematurity. At the time of Bernadette’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in paediatrics.
Bernadette’s mother is now dead and her father is unwell and was unable to assist the Inquiry. None of her sisters was able to provide any relevant additional information. It appears that Bernadette’s mother had never had any suspicion about the cause of Bernadette’s death.
The Inquiry has had access to Bernadette’s hospital medical records although her nursing records are no longer available. Professor Richard Baker has considered and commented on the available documents.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers.
The Hospital Records
The first entry in Bernadette’s medical records was timed at 8am on Wednesday, 5th
January and was made by Shipman. He recorded that Bernadette had been delivered as a
‘S.U.D.’
(sudden uterine death), and that no doctor had examined her body at that time, because it was thought that she was stillborn. However, at 7.40am, a nurse noticed that she was breathing and, ten minutes later, she was put in an incubator. Shipman noted that she was of 31 weeks’ gestation by her mother’s menstrual dates.
Shipman examined Bernadette and recorded that she had a breathing rate of between 10 and 20 breaths per minute (this is rather slow) but that she had a good colour and a normal pulse rate. She weighed just under two pounds. Shipman requested a chest x-ray. He queried the possibility that Bernadette was suffering from pneumonia or respiratory distress syndrome. The chest x-ray showed that the lungs were not fully aerated. Shipman saw Bernadette twice more that day and made detailed notes about her condition and of the results of various tests that were carried out.
On 6th
January, Shipman noted that Bernadette was still alive and seemed to be doing well. He suggested that her therapy should be monitored. At 9am on 7th
January, Shipman noted that Bernadette was
‘Not too bad this morning’
. But then, at midday, he noticed that her apnoea alarm kept going off. This is a device which draws attention to any interruption in the child’s breathing. Shipman noted that there was
‘little to do’
. By this, I infer that he meant that there was little that could be done for her. Professor Baker has observed that such an approach would have been fairly representative of the policy towards treatment of cases of this type in a hospital such as PGI at that time.
There are no further entries for the afternoon of that day until 6pm, when Shipman made the following entry:
‘
18.00
Died
full examination
D.C. - Prematurity’
.
This is followed by a further note made by Shipman on 8th
January to the effect that he had signed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death. Apart from these entries, there are a number of documents containing requests for pathology, biochemical and other tests to be performed, together with the results of those tests.
On 11th
January 1972, Dr Douglas Pickup, consultant paediatrician, wrote to Mrs McCourt’s general practitioner, describing Bernadette’s history. He noted that it was surprising that she had lived for two days. He attributed this to the skill of the nursing staff and suggested that, had she survived, Bernadette would probably have begun to shown signs of brain damage.
Medical Evidence
Professor Baker reviewed the history available from the hospital medical records. In particular, he observed that the blood test results were compatible with respiratory difficulties. According to Professor Baker, survival at 31 weeks’ gestation in 1972 would have been relatively uncommon. His observations continue:
‘The records do not give rise to suspicion about Shipman’s actions, and clinical management appears to be fairly typical of care in a district maternity hospital at that time. However, please note the poor photocopy of the records available to me.’
In fact, PGI was not a maternity hospital but no higher standard of care would have been expected on a paediatric ward at a hospital such as PGI.
Conclusion
There is, by reason of the passage of time, very little independent evidence available in this case. However, the hospital notes provide sufficient information for me to be able to say that Bernadette was very vulnerable at birth by reason of her prematurity, low birth weight and unexpanded lungs. She received care that was typical of that provided at the time. As Professor Baker has pointed out, both Bernadette’s progress and her eventual death are consistent with what would be expected in the case of a child born at about 31 weeks’ gestation in the early 1970s. What gives rise to concern, of course, is the fact that the only medical record that exists was made by Shipman who may have been present, possibly alone, at the death. I do not, however, think that I should infer that Shipman did anything to imperil Bernadette’s tenuous hold on life. The entries he made in her notes on the days before her death suggest that he was giving her appropriate treatment. On the day of the death, he recorded signs of breathing difficulties. There are no suspicious features in the medical records.
Where Shipman was involved in treating a patient who died, I cannot rule out the possibility that he did something to cause the death. However, in this case, there is no evidence to suggest that he did. My conclusion is that Bernadette’s death was almost certainly natural and was due to her extreme prematurity.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001