The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Norah Nuttall
Introduction
Mrs Norah Nuttall died on 26th
January 1998 at the age of 64. She lived with her son, Mr John Anthony Nuttall. She was a patient of Shipman and thought well of him.
Personal Background
According to her son, Mrs Nuttall was in good general health before her death. She was very independent and often went into Hyde to shop and see friends. Her medical records show that she was obese and suffered from a number of chronic conditions. Dr John Grenville said that there was a history of rheumatic fever, which predisposed her to valvular disease of the heart. There were some references to ischaemic heart disease. The records mentioned breathlessness on exertion and oedema of the legs. The most frequently recurring entries related to nosebleeds. Dr Grenville considered that Mrs Nuttall appeared to have quite severe heart disease and had been appropriately treated, although not well investigated.
The Circumstances of the Death
Shortly before her death, Mrs Nuttall developed a cough. This did not keep her indoors and, on the morning of the day of her death, she went into Hyde to see Shipman. She met some friends who later said that she appeared to be her usual self. When Mr Nuttall came home from work at 2pm, his mother told him that Shipman had given her some medicine and advised her to stay indoors for a couple of days. She did not say that she was expecting Shipman to call. Mr Nuttall was not concerned for his mother's health. Shortly before 3pm, he went out to attend to his ponies.
When Mr Nuttall returned, about 40 minutes later, he saw Shipman's car outside. Shipman was leaving the house. He asked Shipman what was wrong. Shipman told him that his mother was not well and he had rung for an ambulance to take her to hospital. In fact he had not. Mr Nuttall ran into the house and found his mother slumped in a chair, apparently asleep. When he spoke to her, there was no response. Shipman came in behind him and said that it looked as though his mother had taken a turn for the worse. Shipman touched her neck and said, 'She's gone.' He looked in her eye. When Mr Nuttall asked if anything could be done, Shipman said that she had gone and there was nothing he could do. He pretended to cancel the ambulance.
Shipman told Mr Nuttall that he had been visiting nearby when he had received a call asking him to visit Mrs Nuttall and he had come at once. That was not true and, in evidence, Shipman admitted that he had just decided to call on her. He claimed that Mrs Nuttall had told him that she had chest pains. He said that the death had been due to the failure of the left ventricle of the heart. He told Mr Nuttall that, in such a case, a patient would become unconscious and die within about 20 minutes and that, even if the paramedics had come, they would not have been able to save Mrs Nuttall. He did not mention a post-mortem examination. He said that the funeral directors could take the body away.
Shipman telephoned Mrs Oldham, Mrs Nuttall's sister, and told her that he had received a call asking him to visit Mrs Nuttall. He said that, when he arrived, he had found Mrs Nuttall was poorly. She had taken a turn for the worse and died.
The Day after Death
The following day, when Mr Nuttall and Mrs Oldham went to the surgery to collect the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), Shipman purported to demonstrate from the records that Mrs Nuttall had been suffering from breathlessness and high blood pressure.
The Defence Case
The medical record for the day of death shows that Mrs Nuttall attended the surgery complaining of wheezy bronchitis and was given a decongestant. She was also seen in her own home, when she was dead on examination.
Shipman's account in evidence, which the jury must have rejected, was that, when Mrs Nuttall came into the surgery on the morning of 26th
January, he diagnosed her as suffering from wheezy bronchitis. She seemed to be all right. He gave her a bottle of cough medicine. At some time between 3pm and 4pm he decided to call on her. He gave a variety of reasons for this visit, such as wishing to see how she was managing in her 'new' house, in which she had then been living for about eight years. His reasons were not credible. He said that Mrs Nuttall had been surprised to see him. As she sat down, she said she was glad he had called, as she was worse than she had been in the morning. She was very breathless, she felt ill and her ankles had swelled up. She had not wanted to bother him by telephoning the surgery. He examined her and found her ankles were swollen and her pulse was 'thready'. On listening to her chest, it was clear she had fluid in the lungs. She was very breathless, cold and slightly blue round the lips. He made a provisional diagnosis of left ventricular failure. He decided to give her an injection of Lasix, a rapid-effect diuretic, so he went out to the car to collect it. As he was going out, Mrs Nuttall's son arrived. Shipman explained that he had just called to see Mrs Nuttall and that she was seriously ill. He was fetching a drug from his car and would then call an ambulance. Shipman followed Mr Nuttall into the house and was preparing the syringe, when he realised that Mrs Nuttall had stopped breathing. He felt her pulse, looked at her pupils and listened to her heart and chest. She was dead. He decided not to attempt resuscitation, as it would not succeed and would be distressing for her son. He explained to Mr Nuttall what had happened. He did not suggest a post-mortem examination, as he felt confident of his diagnosis of left ventricular failure. When he spoke to Mrs Oldham, he advised that a post-mortem was not necessary. Later Mr Nuttall said he did not want a post-mortem. Shipman had not called an ambulance and had not said that he had done so.
Certification
On the MCCD, Shipman stated that the cause of death was left ventricular failure of 15 minutes' duration. This was due to congestive heart failure of three years' duration. Hypertension for four years and obesity for 20 years had also contributed. As Mrs Nuttall was to be cremated, Shipman completed Form B, stating that he had seen Mrs Nuttall immediately before death. The mode of death was syncope of ten minutes' duration. Shipman claimed to have carried out a full external examination after death. He stated that Mr Nuttall was present at the death.
Dr Jeremy Dirckze signed Form C, confirming the cause of death as left ventricular failure. He said he would have relied entirely on what Shipman had told him. He had no recollection of the case. Shipman claimed that he had shown Dr Dirckze the medical records but Dr Dirckze did not confirm this.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville said that Shipman's claim to have found Mrs Nuttall in a poorly state did not tally with her son's description of her condition only a short time before. Shipman's description of the death was not typical of ventricular heart failure, in which the patient would be gasping for breath and usually producing froth at the mouth and nose. If, as Shipman suggested, Mrs Nuttall appeared simply to have stopped breathing, she should have been resuscitated, especially as she was only 64.
Comment
This was a cremation case in which there were no remains to be examined. Nonetheless, the jury convicted Shipman of murder. The case bore a number of the hallmarks of a Shipman killing:
Shipman had no proper reason for his decision to call upon the patient. He lied in claiming that the patient had requested a visit. He knew that she was not well because she had called at the surgery that morning. In describing her condition just before death, he exaggerated it, claiming that she was seriously ill when she was not.
The death was extremely sudden and quite unexpected. It occurred while the patient was alone with Shipman. That is an extremely rare event in the experience of most general practitioners.
Shipman chose a cause of death which was plausible, in that Mrs Nuttall had been suffering from heart disease for some time.
Shipman's description of the manner of death was not typical of a death from the cause he diagnosed. Nor was the appearance of the body (sitting in a chair as if asleep) such as would have been expected after a death from heart failure. It was what would be expected from a death from diamorphine.
Shipman did not attempt resuscitation in circumstances in which that would have been the appropriate course if Mrs Nuttall really had gone into acute heart failure.
Shipman lied when he claimed to have rung for an ambulance and pretended to cancel it. This is a feature that occurs in other cases.
Shipman's examination of the body was perfunctory. It was not sufficient to have diagnosed the fact of death. It was as if he already knew that Mrs Nuttall was dead.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001