The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Fanny Nichols
Introduction
Mrs Fanny Nichols died at her home, 17 Ward Street, Hyde on Monday, 26th
April 1993 at the age of 84. She was a widow and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was congestive heart failure resulting from ischaemic heart disease.
Mrs Nichols' death came to the attention of the police in February 1999, when her name was seen in the controlled drugs register of the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy, Hyde, from which it appeared that she had been prescribed a quantity of diamorphine by Shipman. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Brian Nichols (Mrs Nichols' son), Mrs Muriel Elizabeth Nichols (her daughter-in-law), Mr Clifford Dunn (her neighbour), WPC Caroline Margaret Simpson of the Greater Manchester Police, and a pharmacist at the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy, Ms Ghislaine Brant. The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Nichols but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Brian Nichols, Mrs Muriel Nichols, Mr Daniel James Nichols (Mrs Nichols' grandson) and Mrs Susan Durose, the daughter of Mrs Mary Nixon, an elderly friend of Mrs Nichols. A further report was obtained by the Inquiry from Dr Grenville. Mr Brian Nichols and Mrs Muriel Nichols gave oral evidence at a hearing on Monday, 2nd
July 2001. Mrs Nixon did not attend as she was by then rather frail. Dr Grenville gave oral evidence at a hearing on Monday, 23rd
July 2001. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Nichols' general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
Personal Background
Mr Brian Nichols, his wife, Muriel, and their two sons lived close to Ward Street and visited Mrs Nichols very frequently. Mrs Muriel Nichols was very fond of her mother-in-law and saw her every day.
Mrs Nichols' medical records show that she was thought to have suffered from angina for many years. She had also complained of periodic blackouts, which were attributed to an irregular heartbeat. In 1992, she had undergone some investigations at Manchester Royal Infirmary into the cause of her blackouts but these do not appear to have been completed, despite an invitation to Mrs Nichols to attend hospital as an out-patient for this purpose. Her daughter-in-law was of the view that Mrs Nichols had not attended hospital as the problem appeared to have resolved. Dr Grenville, who has studied the medical records, thinks that Mrs Nichols probably had some ischaemia but that this was not severe. It might or might not have accounted for her blackouts. Mrs Nichols suffered from osteoarthritis of the knees with effusion or swelling, for which she took medication. Shipman had also made a number of entries suggesting that Mrs Nichols had congestive heart failure. Dr Grenville, who has examined more than 200 sets of medical records made by Shipman, makes the point that he often seemed to assume that any sign of swelling of the ankles indicated congestive heart failure, although there were other explanations for it, particularly if it occurred mainly in hot weather. Dr Grenville thinks that there is no convincing evidence that Mrs Nichols had chronic congestive heart failure.
Mrs Nichols had had one unsuccessful cataract operation but a second operation, on the other eye, had been highly successful and the resulting improvement in her vision had given her a new lease of life. She was much more confident and mobile.
According to the family, Mrs Nichols had a positive approach to life despite the limitations imposed by her health. She used to walk into Hyde virtually every day. This was not far, only about a quarter of a mile, but she felt that the regular outing and exercise was good for her.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Muriel Nichols last saw her mother-in-law alive on the morning of the day of her death, Monday, 26th
April. In her statement to the police in March 1999, Mrs Muriel Nichols said that she called on her mother-in-law at about 9.30-10am. Her mother-in-law complained of some medical problem and Mrs Muriel Nichols suggested that she should telephone Shipman to request a visit. In her statement made to the Inquiry in 2001, Mrs Muriel Nichols said that she called on her mother-in-law at about 11.30am after she had been shopping. She then said that she found her mother-in-law wearing her coat about to go out into Hyde and learned that she intended to visit Shipman's surgery as she had pains in her legs. At the time, apart from this complaint of pain in the legs, her mother-in-law appeared quite well. When Mrs Muriel Nichols gave oral evidence to the Inquiry she said that she called on her mother-in-law at about 11.30am after she had been into Hyde to shop. She chose that time because, she said, her mother-in-law was a creature of habit, who walked into Hyde every morning and was always back home by 11.15am. Then she said that she recalled that her mother-in-law was wearing her outdoor coat or anorak when she arrived. Mrs Muriel Nichols could not explain why she had previously told the police that she had arrived at her mother-in-law's house between 9.30am and 10am.
It is extremely difficult for witnesses to remember the small details of events such as this so long afterwards. However, I think that Mrs Muriel Nichols' first recollection was probably correct, that she arrived some time between 9.30am and 10am and found her mother-in-law wearing her outdoor coat and preparing to go out. She intended to go to Shipman's surgery because her legs were painful. Very reasonably, Mrs Muriel Nichols persuaded her to stay at home and let the doctor come out to visit her. She telephoned the surgery and requested a visit for her mother-in-law. The visits book, in which the receptionists noted requests for visits, contains the words:
'pains in knees/legs. swollen'
. Having telephoned the surgery, Mrs Nichols then left her mother-in-law and returned home, promising to return later to collect the prescription she expected would be given.
Mrs Nixon called on Mrs Nichols at about noon. The two women usually went out together at about this time. Mrs Nixon found her friend dressed ready to go out but she said that she would not be going as she had not been feeling well and the doctor was coming. Mrs Nixon offered to stay with her but Mrs Nichols declined. She asked Mrs Nixon to leave the front door open when she left. When Mrs Nixon left, she was not concerned about Mrs Nichols, as she did not seem to be seriously ill.
Mrs Muriel Nichols returned to her mother-in-law's house at approximately 3pm to pick up the expected prescription. As she went in, she saw the back of her mother-in-law's head, resting against the back of the sofa. She spoke but Mrs Nichols did not respond. She was dead. Beside her was a small table on which was an empty cup of tea. Feeling bewildered, Mrs Muriel Nichols went to the home of Mr Dunn who lived nearby and was a good friend of Mrs Nichols. She asked him to accompany her to Mrs Nichols' house. He confirmed that it appeared to him that Mrs Nichols was indeed dead. Someone telephoned the police and ambulance. Mrs Muriel Nichols telephoned her husband and Shipman's surgery. She told the receptionist that her mother-in-law had died. She heard the receptionist call out to Shipman and, in her Inquiry statement, she said that he called back, 'What, already?'
The police, ambulance, Shipman and Mr Nichols all arrived within a short time. Mr Nichols thinks that Shipman expressed surprise at the death. Mrs Muriel Nichols does not recollect Shipman saying what was the cause of death but does remember him saying it was just one of those things which happen, considering her age. Mr Nichols remembers Shipman demonstrating that Mrs Nichols had been suffering from excessive water on the knees and ankles and also advising him not to telephone the undertakers immediately, advice which he found strange and which he in any event ignored. Mrs Muriel Nichols asked Shipman whether there would be a post-mortem examination. He said that this would not be necessary.WPC Simpson attended but was informed that Shipman had visited earlier that day and would issue a death certificate. It appeared to WPC Simpson that there were no suspicious circumstances surrounding the death and so she left the house and no further police action was taken.
A prescription was propped up on the fireplace. This was unusual in itself because Mrs Nichols would normally have put the prescription under an ornament or in her pocket. This prescription was later thrown away and neither Mr Nichols nor Mrs Muriel Nichols can remember what it was for.
The medical records contain an entry for the day of the death, which reads as follows:
'Breathless on exertion
going upstairs on all fours!!
aches
all
over no chest pain
HS I II soft 2/6
JVP
ankle oedema
Knees
basal creps
liver 2fb
=
CHF
refuses hospital
TLUK
P.U OK only on moduretic
Change to Lasix 40mg
s
Innovace 5mg
see
mane'
.
Dr Grenville interpreted this to mean that Mrs Nichols had complained of breathlessness on exertion of such severity that she was unable to walk upstairs. She ached all over but had no chest pain. On examination, Shipman found the heart sounds were normal but noted a soft murmur, which Dr Grenville said was of no significance. Shipman claimed that the jugular venous pressure was raised and there was swelling due to fluid retention at the ankles going up as far as the knees. He heard basal crepitations in the lungs and found that the liver was palpable to the extent of two fingers' breadth. He had diagnosed congestive heart failure and had advised Mrs Nichols that she should go to hospital, but she had refused. He noted that she was passing urine satisfactorily. She was taking Moduretic, a diuretic of moderate strength. He decided to prescribe Lasix, which is a more powerful diuretic. However, he prescribed this to be taken orally and did not make any arrangement for this to be given as a matter of urgency. He also prescribed Innovace for heart failure. He also wrote
'TLUK'
which is short for 'to let us know'. This could have been intended to mean that Mrs Nichols would let him know if she changed her mind about refusing to go to hospital or it could have been intended to mean that she would get in touch with him if she needed further help. He intended to review her the following day.
The question arises as to whether this is a genuine record of Shipman's observations on the day of Mrs Nichols' death or a false account fabricated for the purpose of explaining the death which would soon be discovered.
Certification
Shipman completed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) in which he said that the cause of death was congestive heart failure of five years' duration due to ischaemic heart disease of 12 years' duration. He said that he had seen Mrs Nichols alive on the day of death.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Nichols died at
'1500hrs'
and that he had last seen her alive about two hours before death. That would be at about 1pm. He said he had examined her body 30 minutes after death and carried out a complete external examination. The family disputes that a complete external examination was carried out. Shipman said that the mode of death was collapse of only seconds' duration. However, as he also said that no one was present at the death, his statement about the mode of death must have been based upon assumption. He said that he based the answer partly on his own observations and partly on the statement made by
'daughter'
which must be a reference to Mrs Muriel Nichols. He also stated that Mrs Nichols was found by
'daughter still warm'
. Mrs Muriel Nichols accepts that that is right in that, when she touched her mother-in-law, she was not cold, as she had expected. If that is right, her death had occurred only a short time before. But no one can say at what time Shipman visited.
The Aftermath
As a postscript to the evidence in this case, on 27th
April 1993, the day after she died, one 30mg ampoule diamorphine was dispensed from the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy, Market Street, Hyde for Mrs Nichols following the presentation of the prescription issued by Shipman. There is of course no record in the notes of any such prescription.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville says that before her death there was no convincing evidence that Mrs Nichols had chronic heart failure or any serious heart problem.
Dr Grenville considers that the records Shipman made on the day of the death were fabricated. I share his view. My experience of medical records kept by Shipman has shown that they must always be approached with caution and a critical eye. He often made false records designed to cover up his involvement in a death. Here, Shipman has made a record that presents a picture of a person suffering from quite severe heart failure. Dr Grenville has drawn attention to a number of flaws in Shipman's picture of Mrs Nichols' condition.
First, when Mrs Muriel Nichols and her husband were asked about the suggestion that Mrs Nichols had been breathless so as to be unable to walk upstairs, they said that this was not the case at all. She walked into Hyde regularly and on the morning of the 26th
, she had been planning to walk into Hyde. Second, it is to be noted that Shipman did not record having taken Mrs Nichols' blood pressure or her pulse, both of which would be usual aspects of an examination and would provide information relevant to a diagnosis of congestive heart failure. Third, the record that the liver was palpable to the extent of two fingers' breadth indicates a severe degree of chronic heart failure, which would have taken a substantial period to develop and is not really consistent with the findings at Manchester Royal Infirmary the previous year. Fourth, and most surprising of all, despite advising Mrs Nichols that she should be admitted to hospital and by implication believing her to be in need of treatment more intensive than that which could be provided at home, Shipman did not give her any treatment at all. In particular, he did not give her or arrange for her to be given an injection of Lasix, which would be standard treatment for severe congestive heart failure. Nor did he arrange for supervision by her family, social services or the district nursing service. Instead, he accepted her supposed refusal to be admitted without even suggesting to her that she should contact a relative to discuss the advice she had been given.
The record made by Shipman of this consultation with Mrs Nichols does not make sense and the picture he paints is not consistent with other evidence that I accept as true and accurate.
Professor Richard Baker found the case highly suspicious on account of the contents both of the medical records and of the cremation forms.
Conclusion
There are a number of highly suspicious features in this case. First, the death was discovered shortly after a visit by Shipman, during which he was alone with the patient and had the opportunity to administer a drug. No one saw Mrs Nichols alive or spoke to her after his visit. Given what is known of Shipman's activities, that gives rise to grave suspicion.
Second, although Mrs Nichols may have been at some increased risk of a sudden cardiac death, it would be a coincidence if she succumbed to that risk within an hour or two of a visit by Shipman, particularly as he did not visit her regularly.
Shipman's account of the consultation does not make good medical sense, for all the reasons I outlined above. Although it is theoretically possible that Mrs Nichols could have gone into severe heart failure in the short time since her daughter-in-law and Mrs Nixon had seen her, it is most unlikely. Had she become ill after Mrs Nixon's departure, she would have telephoned her son or daughter-in-law. If she were ill, it is very unlikely that she would have refused hospital admission, at least without discussing her decision with the family. No sensible doctor would have behaved as Shipman suggests he did, advising the patient that she needed admission and then leaving her without immediate treatment when she rejected his advice. The account simply does not ring true. I am satisfied that it is a fabrication.
Mrs Nichols' appearance in death is not typical of a sudden death from heart failure which, as Dr Grenville has explained in his generic evidence, is invariably an extremely distressing process with the patient gasping for air and the secretions from the lungs apparent on the face or clothing. On the other hand, Mrs Nichols' appearance was entirely what would be expected following a death from morphine poisoning.
I am sure that Shipman was responsible for the death of Mrs Nichols.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001