The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Nora Needham
Introduction
Mrs Nora Needham died at her home, Coachman's Cottage, Oaklands, Godley, Hyde on Friday, 26th
January 1996 at the age of 76. She had probably been a patient of Shipman for about five years. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to congestive heart failure.
On 1st
February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions at Preston Crown Court, Mrs Pamela Farrer Needham (the wife of Mrs Needham's son, Mr Thomas Anthony Needham) expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her mother-in-law's death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mr Needham. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken witness statements from Mr and Mrs Thomas Needham and has had access to Mrs Needham's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Needham was a colourful and slightly eccentric personality. She was small and plump in build. She was a heavy smoker. She had a history of cardiac problems. She had a suspected heart attack in December 1976 and another in February 1977, although Mr Needham says that she made a good recovery. She suffered intermittently from swollen legs, which may have been a sign of congestive heart failure. In 1994, she was referred to the Cardiology Department at Manchester Royal Infirmary where she presented something of a diagnostic problem. It was eventually decided that she had some enlargement of the left ventricle but no aneurysm and she was reassured that there was no real cause for concern. She was monitored for congestive heart failure over the next two years and very few symptoms were apparent. However, Dr Grenville says that the past history of heart attack and congestive heart failure, together with her smoking history and raised cholesterol levels, put Mrs Needham at extremely high risk of suffering a sudden cardiac death. In the last six months before she died, Mrs Needham had some gastric problems, and two car accidents left her somewhat lacking in confidence. The medical records and correspondence confirm these gastric problems and also reveal that on 10th
November 1995, Mrs Needham was complaining of pain in her spine.
Mrs Needham had the same routine every morning. She would usually wake up at 5am. She would make her bed and switch on her electric blanket before going downstairs and turning on the television. She would eat breakfast, put the dishes in the sink and leave her dentures in a mug before returning to bed at about 7am, where she would stay until late morning or early afternoon. She would sometimes also smoke a cigarette before returning to bed.
The Events Leading up to Death
The appointments sheet for Monday, 22nd
January 1996 suggests that Mrs Needham was to see Shipman in the surgery, although it is not known why. Her family remembers that she had been quite well that weekend. There is no entry in her medical records for that day.
Mr Needham visited his mother at home on the evening of Thursday, 25th
January. He found her to be in good spirits and she made no complaint about her health. He left her at about 8pm. He told the police that, shortly after his arrival home, he received a telephone call from his mother. They spoke for a short while and Mrs Needham made no mention of feeling unwell.
On the morning of 26th
January, Mr Needham was at work when he received two telephone calls from a close friend of his mother, who was concerned because she had not been able to contact her that morning. He left work a few minutes early and arrived at his mother's home at about 1pm. He was able to let himself in through the rear patio doors. He told the police that they were never locked, although he told the Inquiry that they were locked at night. He walked straight into the lounge and noticed that the television set was on. He could not find his mother and went upstairs to look for her. He found that his mother's bed was made and that the electric blanket had been switched on. Mr Needham returned downstairs and found his mother lying on the kitchen floor near to the sink. It looked as though someone had laid her out on the carpet. Mr Needham realised that his mother must have lit a cigarette just before collapsing because he could see that there was a cigarette smouldering on the carpet near to where she was lying. The first and middle fingers of her right hand were still held in a 'V' shape where she had been holding her cigarette. Mr Needham could see that his mother had eaten breakfast that morning, that the dishes were in the kitchen sink and that her dentures were in a mug on the kitchen worktop.
Mr Needham telephoned for the police and an ambulance. The paramedics examined Mrs Needham and carried her onto a settee in the lounge and covered her with a blanket. They said that there was nothing they could do.
Shipman was contacted and arrived a short while later. He did not examine the body. Mr Needham recalls that Shipman handed him a piece of paper. He does not think that this piece of paper was the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), although it probably was. Mr Needham recalls thinking that the document must have been completed before Shipman arrived because he does not remember Shipman completing the form at the house.
According to the appointments sheets, Shipman was due to see his first patient in surgery at 8.45am that morning. The visits book reveals that he was to visit two patients that day, although no indication is given as to the times of these visits. There is then the entry:
'Nora Needham - dead'
.
The last entry in Mrs Needham's handwritten general practitioner records reads as follows:
'
26 1 96
13.30
Patient seen
Dead
from body temp
6.00
this AM
D
MI
CHF'
.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD. He said that he had last seen Mrs Needham alive on 16th
January 1996, although there is no note in the medical records or in any of the practice documentation of any consultation on that day. He said that the approximate interval between the onset of her congestive heart failure and her death was two years and that the approximate interval between the onset of her coronary thrombosis and her death was
'seconds'
. He said that there would not be a post-mortem examination and he had seen Mrs Needham's body after death.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He said that death had occurred at
'about 0600 hrs'
on 26th
January 1996. He stated that he had attended Mrs Needham for three years during her last illness. He said again that he last saw Mrs Needham alive on 16th
January 1996. Shipman said that he made a complete external examination of the body about six hours after death. He stated that the mode of death was collapse lasting only seconds. Since he was not present at the death, this can only be speculation. He claimed that his views on the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and on statements made by Mrs Needham's son. No one had nursed Mrs Needham in her last illness and no one had been present at her death.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville says that the position in which Mrs Needham was found was consistent with a sudden death from a heart attack. It was not typical of the position in which most of Shipman's victims were found after being injected with a lethal dose of diamorphine. As Mrs Needham was at a very high risk of suffering a heart attack, he thinks that many doctors would have certified this death as being due to a heart attack even though they had not had the benefit of an eye-witness account of what had happened. He concludes that Mrs Needham probably died of a heart attack. The absence of previous angina symptoms did not exclude death due to heart attack.
Professor Richard Baker classified the death as moderately suspicious on the basis of the information supplied in the cremation forms and as highly suspicious on the basis of the contents of the medical records. He implied that referral to the coroner might have been expected, although he did not at that time know in what position Mrs Needham had been found. He recorded the long-standing history of cardiovascular disease and went on to say, considering the recorded history next to the stated cause of death:
'There is a reasonable match, but no premorbid events to suggest getting worse, or likely to have an MI in near future - no consults for angina or worse failure'
.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Needham died a natural death.
Mrs Needham was at extremely high risk of suffering a heart attack at any time. Her death was sudden and was no doubt unexpected to her family but, from a medical viewpoint, it was certainly explicable.
There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman saw Mrs Needham shortly before her death was discovered. From her son's description of her usual habits and his account of the circumstances of her death, it seems likely that she died in the early morning. It is most unlikely that Shipman would have visited Mrs Needham at this time.
The position of her body was more suggestive of a sudden cardiac death than of death by a lethal injection of opiate.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001