The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Hervey Nuttall
Introduction
Mr Hervey Nuttall died at his home, 14 Chartist House, Hyde on Wednesday, 6th
September 1978 at the age of 74. He was a patient of Shipman, who certified that the cause of his death was bronchopneumonia due to cerebrovascular accident.
In September 2001, the Inquiry advertised in several newspapers, seeking further information about a number of deaths for which Shipman had certified the cause of death. In response to that advertisement, Mr Nuttall's niece, Mrs Ena Doreen Jones, wrote to the Inquiry on 15th
September 2001. She indicated that Shipman had seen Mr Nuttall on the day of his death. Mrs Jones has also provided a statement to the Inquiry. Although several witnesses, including Mr Nuttall's wife, would have been in a position to give useful evidence, they are all now dead. The Inquiry has had access to the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD).
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
At the time of his death, Mr Nuttall lived with his wife. They kept themselves to themselves, save that Mrs Jones' mother, Mrs Ena Doreen Bailey, visited them two or three times a week and would help them with shopping and other errands, as she had a car. Mrs Jones would visit them about once a fortnight.
Apart from being partially sighted, Mr Nuttall enjoyed excellent health until shortly before his death.
Mrs Jones recalls that, in the days leading up to his death, her uncle was ill in bed. She last saw him alive about two days before he died. She thought he had a bad cold or influenza. He seemed feverish. She does not mention that this illness began with Mr Nuttall suffering a stroke, although it is possible that he did and she has forgotten. Mrs Jones recalls that her uncle was tired, lethargic and seemed a little depressed. His breathing was 'noisy and rattling' and he was chesty. Mrs Jones does not recall whether or not her uncle was on any medication. She thinks that her aunt had called the doctor out to him.
The Day of the Death
At some point shortly before 4pm on 6th
September 1978, Mrs Jones' mother telephoned her to say that her uncle had died. She went to his flat, where she saw her mother. She believes that her mother told her that a doctor had visited her uncle that day, although now she is not sure of this. She thinks, however, that a doctor had visited her uncle on the day before his death and on the day of his death. He had come to the flat again after the death to see the body. Nothing struck Mrs Jones as unusual about the death and she is unable now to recall how her uncle appeared. Her mother and aunt never expressed any concern to her about the circumstances of the death. Mrs Jones thinks that her aunt was present at the death.
The Inquiry has contacted the Chartist House warden, Mrs Jennifer Unsworth. Although she remembered Mr Nuttall, she is unable to recall anything about the circumstances surrounding his death.
Certification
The counterfoil to the MCCD, completed by Shipman on 7th
September 1978, records that he last saw Mr Nuttall alive on 6th
September, the day of the death. Shipman also stated that he had seen the body after death and that there would be no post-mortem examination. The cause of death was bronchopneumonia due to cerebrovascular accident.
The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') says that Mrs Nuttall, the widow, was present at the death.
The Expert Evidence
In his generic report to the Inquiry, Dr John Grenville stated:
'Bronchopneumonia is a serious illness and is usually seen in debilitated patients. It is a common cause of death in patients suffering from other terminal diseases. Such patients are frequently immobile and do not have the strength to cough. These two factors cause a build up of secretions in the lungs which easily become infected. This causes noisy rattly breathing and may cause shortness of breath although this may not be a feature since the patients are often completely immobile. Bronchopneumonia can be treated with antibiotics, either oral or by injection and with chest physiotherapy but in such debilitated patients the outlook is often very poor.
...
Patients dying of bronchopneumonia are usually weak and become exhausted. They usually lapse into unconsciousness and the respiration becomes increasingly rattly. Eventually the respiratory effort decreases and the breaths become shallower until they cease altogether'
.
Conclusion
It appears to me highly likely that Mr Nuttall died a natural death. Although he had enjoyed excellent health until not long before he died, the evidence is that he was seriously ill shortly before his death. He was bedridden and his breathing was noisy and rattly.
Although Mrs Jones does not suggest that her uncle had previously been debilitated and does not recall that he had suffered a stroke, it is quite possible that he had done. These events took place over 20 years ago and it would be wholly understandable if Mrs Jones had forgotten some of the background to her uncle's final illness. She does recall the final stages and her description of her uncle two days before his death is strongly suggestive of bronchopneumonia.
Although there is evidence that Shipman last saw Mr Nuttall alive on the day of his death, it would appear that his wife was present when he died and no concern has ever been expressed by the family. Mr Nuttall would have been an unlikely victim of Shipman. He was living with his wife and the death occurred very soon after Shipman had arrived in Hyde. Although I cannot rule out the possibility that Shipman caused or hastened Mr Nuttall's death by administering an injection during the visit when he last saw Mr Nuttall alive, I think it is far more likely that the death was entirely natural.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001