The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Violet Nicholls
Introduction
Mrs Violet Nicholls died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 12th
July 1983 at the age of 83. She was probably a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was senility.
Mrs Nicholls' son, Mr John Nicholls, died about five years ago. The Inquiry has been in contact with Mr Nicholls' widow, Mrs Marjorie Nicholls, but she has no relevant information to add to that which is already available and no statement has been taken from her.
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs Nicholls, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, Shipman's visits book for 1983, the Donneybrook Surgery duty doctor diary and the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
According to her death certificate, Mrs Nicholls was a widow. It would appear that she was admitted to Charnley House on 24th
March 1983, about four months before she died.
From the time of her admission, it appears that Mrs Nicholls was often confused. In the weeks leading up to her death, she had several falls and suffered from a stomach upset.
The Charnley House daily diary records that, on Saturday, 2nd
July 1983, the emergency doctor (not Shipman) was called out because Mrs Nicholls had begun to have fits. The doctor gave Mrs Nicholls an injection and said that it was
'wasn't worth'
moving her to Tameside Hospital. He left a prescription for some tablets for her temperature, although the nature of the medication is not recorded in the diary. After the doctor had gone, Mrs Nicholls had a few
'slight shakes'
in the night. The staff telephoned her son to let him know that they had called out the doctor. The following day, Mrs Nicholls seemed better and was visited by her son.
On Monday, 4th
July 1983, Mrs Nicholls was seen by Shipman who prescribed Epanutin, usually given for epilepsy. This visit is recorded both in the Charnley House daily diary and in Shipman's own visits book.
On Sunday, 10th
July 1983, Mrs Nicholls had a poor appetite and was very hard to rouse. She was seen by Shipman on Monday, 11th
July, and he suggested that she be given fluids hourly. He thought that her condition the previous day might have been due to dehydration. It appears that the weather was very hot. He prescribed no medication. The visits book confirms Shipman's visit on Monday, 11th
July.
On the evening of Monday, 11th
July, Mrs Nicholls was said to be perspiring heavily. There was obviously some concern about her condition because her relatives were informed about it. The night report says that Mrs Nicholls was given hourly drinks through the night. She was still perspiring heavily but had a good night's sleep.
The Day of the Death
On Tuesday, 12th
July 1983, the day of Mrs Nicholls' death, the staff gave her plenty of fluids every hour. However, she deteriorated rapidly. Her relatives were telephoned again, presumably because there was concern that her death might be imminent. It is recorded that she
'passed away peacefully'
at 7pm. It appears that a doctor must have attended to certify the fact of death as the undertaker removed the body later that evening. The duty doctor diary confirms that Shipman was not on duty that evening.
Certification
The MCCD has not been recovered, but its counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman completed the MCCD counterfoil on 13th
July 1983, the day after the death. He said that he had last seen Mrs Nicholls alive on the day of her death. He said that there was to be no post-mortem examination and that he had seen Mrs Nicholls' body after her death, presumably at the undertakers. There is no documentary confirmation that Shipman saw Mrs Nicholls on the day of her death, as he suggests on the MCCD counterfoil. The records suggest he had last seen her on 11th
July 1983.
Conclusion
Mrs Nicholls had been very confused for several months before her death. Her condition deteriorated in the days leading up to her death. Her death was neither sudden nor unexpected. The picture revealed by the daily diary would justify giving the cause of death as senility, which at the time was used interchangeably with old age.
Apart from Shipman's entry on the MCCD counterfoil, there is no evidence that Shipman saw Mrs Nicholls on the day of her death. It is possible that he saw her on 12th
July even though neither his visits book nor the daily diary has recorded the visit. I think it is more likely that he made an error when completing the MCCD. He was often careless in completing death and cremation certificates.
If Shipman did see Mrs Nicholls on the day of her death, it is possible that he visited her shortly before she died and gave her an excessive dose of an opiate which hastened her death. I think that this is very unlikely because the Charnley House staff usually recorded a doctor's visits and, also, Shipman usually made his visits between late morning and mid-afternoon. A lethal injection of an opiate given during that time would have resulted in death well before 7pm.
There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman over-sedated Mrs Nicholls in the days before her death. She appears to have been conscious until not long before her death. Also, there is no reference to injections in the daily diary.
I conclude that it is very likely that Mrs Nicholls died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001