The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Lily Nichols
Introduction
Mrs Lily Nichols died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Wednesday, 26th
September 1984 at the age of 80. She was a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed advertisements in a number of newspapers, publishing a list of cases in which the Inquiry had only limited information as to the circumstances of the death and in which no relatives had been traced. In response, the Inquiry was contacted by Mrs Nichols' daughter, Mrs Beryl Bridge, who said that her mother had been a patient of Shipman for about eight months and that she had no suspicions about her mother's death. Mrs Bridge has since confirmed that this is so. She says that her mother had been very ill on the last occasion she visited, which was shortly before the death.
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), Shipman's visits book for 1984, the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book and the admissions register and daily diary from Charnley House.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
Mrs Nichols was admitted to Charnley House on 19th
December 1983, from her home in Old Road, Tintwistle. Her death certificate reveals that she was the widow of Mr Harry Nichols, who had been a general labourer, and that Mrs Nichols had at some time suffered from cancer in her left breast.
By September 1984, it would appear from the Charnley House daily diary that Mrs Nichols was quite frail. She had a poor appetite and went to bed early each night.
On Tuesday, 18th
September 1984, the Charnley House diary records that Shipman looked in on Mrs Nichols whilst he was visiting another resident. He directed that the staff should continue general nursing care and that they should encourage Mrs Nichols to take nourishing fluids and solids when possible. He remarked that Mrs Nichols had deteriorated rapidly. The staff noted that she had not passed urine that day. Mrs Nichols was to be carefully observed. On 19th
September, the staff contacted Mrs Bridge and she visited the following day. She told the staff she had the impression that her mother was in pain. The likely source of her pain was pressure sores. Cream was applied to these regularly and Mrs Nichols was turned every two hours.
Over the following days, Mrs Nichols' condition remained static but, on Monday, 24th
September, the diary records that her condition was deteriorating further. She was given
'all care'
, she took no fluids and it was requested that her lips be kept moist. Her condition did not improve during the day.
Mrs Bridge says that she saw her mother on the evening of Tuesday, 25th
September. She was very ill.
The Charnley House diary records that Mrs Nichols died at 6am on Wednesday, 26th
September 1984. When Mrs Bridge learned of the death, she was not surprised.
Shipman completed the MCCD counterfoil and almost certainly the MCCD itself on 26th
September 1984, the day of the death. He wrote that he had last seen Mrs Nichols alive on 20th
September 1984. He said that he had seen Mrs Nichols' body after her death and that there would be no post-mortem examination. Mrs Nichols' name appears in Shipman's visits book for 26th
September and alongside her name appears the date
'20.9.84'
. It would appear that Shipman was reminding himself when he had last seen Mrs Nichols although, if the Charnley House diary is right, he had not seen Mrs Nichols since 18th September.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Nichols died a natural death. The daily diary records a gradual decline and the death was neither sudden nor unexpected. It appears that it was appropriate for Shipman to certify the cause of death as old age. There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman saw Mrs Nichols in the period before her death and had probably not seen her for six days. Mrs Nichols' name probably appears in Shipman's visits book for the day of the death because he had been asked to attend the home to certify the cause of death. I am sure Mrs Bridge was right to have no suspicions about Shipman's role in her mother's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001