The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Annie Nash
Introduction
Mrs Annie Nash died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Friday, 12th
May 1972, at the age of 70. She had been admitted to PGI three days earlier. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident. At the time of Mrs Nash’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
Mr Edwin Nash, Mrs Nash’s husband, was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’), but he has since died. The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Nash’s daughter, Mrs Annie Higgins. That statement was made on her own behalf and on behalf of her brother (also Mr Edwin Nash), her sister, Mrs Hilda Evans, and her nephew, Mr David Hetherington. Mrs Nash’s body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. The Inquiry received a letter from Mrs Higgins in September 2004, after she had signed her statement, commenting further on the cremation forms. A statement has also been taken from Mrs Kathleen Naylor who was the senior nursing sister on Ward 1 at the time of Mrs Nash’s death. Mrs Nash’s hospital records are no longer available. No post-mortem examination was performed.
Mrs Higgins has expressed concern about the circumstances of her mother’s death because she did not expect her to die and because she does not think that Shipman’s answers to the questions on Form B were accurate.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mrs Nash was married and lived with her husband at the time of her death. Mr and Mrs Nash had five children of their own and also brought up Mr Hetherington. Mrs Higgins says that the family had always been close. All members of the family lived in the same area and the children saw Mr and Mrs Nash regularly.
Mrs Higgins remembers that her mother had always been in good health. She was fit and active and rarely visited her general practitioner. So far as Mrs Higgins was aware, Mrs Nash did not suffer from heart trouble or high blood pressure. Mrs Higgins’ sister, Mrs Evans, recalls that their mother suffered from anaemia some years before she died, but otherwise she enjoyed good health.
Mrs Higgins recalls that, around Easter 1972, four to five weeks before her mother died, her father was diagnosed with diabetes. He was very unwell and spent two or three weeks as an in-patient at Pinderfields Hospital. Mrs Nash was very worried about her husband.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
On the evening of Tuesday, 9th
May 1972, three days before she died, Mrs Nash went to play bingo with members of her family. At about 7pm or 7.30pm, whilst at the bingo hall, she suffered what appeared to be a stroke. She slumped over and did not respond when spoken to. An ambulance was called and she was taken to PGI. There was a shortage of beds and it was suggested that Mrs Nash should be admitted to Headlands Hospital. The family asked that she remain at PGI and, some hours after her arrival, she was admitted to a side room on Ward 1. Mrs Higgins saw her mother and remembers that her eyes were open. Mrs Higgins says that her brother remembers being told that Mrs Nash was unconscious. He said at the time that Mrs Nash must be conscious because her eyes were open but was told that this was not the case and that Mrs Nash was indeed unconscious. Mrs Higgins recalls being told that Mrs Nash had suffered a stroke. She remembers a young doctor asking Mrs Nash some questions but she was unable to answer.
In-Patient Treatment
All the family except Mrs Eileen Hetherington, Mrs Higgins’ elder sister, left the hospital at about 9pm on the Tuesday evening. Mrs Hetherington stayed at the hospital that night, throughout the next day and through the night of Wednesday, 10th
May. A number of family members visited Mrs Nash in the afternoon or evening of Wednesday, 10th
May. Mrs Higgins says that her mother was very restless and fidgety. She recalls that, at one point, Mrs Nash tried to stop a member of the family from taking her watch off. Her eyes were closed. Her face had drooped slightly on one side. She did not attempt to say anything and Mrs Higgins thought that her mother had lost her power of speech.
The Day of the Death
Several family members, including Mrs Higgins, visited Mrs Nash on the evening of Friday, 12th
May, the day of her death. At about 8pm, just before visiting time ended, Mrs Higgins went to ask a nurse if her mother could have a drink of water, as her lips were very dry. The nurse told her not to worry and said that she would get a doctor to have a look at Mrs Nash. The family left the hospital and returned to Mrs Higgins’ home. They did not think that Mrs Nash was close to death; if they had thought that she was, they would not have left her bedside. At about 9pm, about half an hour after they had arrived home, there was a telephone call from the hospital to inform them that Mrs Nash had died. The family was very shocked at the news.
Mrs Higgins went to the hospital with her father on Saturday, 13th
May to collect the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death. They did not speak to any medical or nursing staff.
Certification
The death was registered on 13th
May 1972. Shipman completed cremation Form B. He stated that Mrs Nash had died at
‘2045hrs’
. He said that he had attended Mrs Nash during her last illness for a period of three days. That would be accurate. He stated that he had last seen Mrs Nash alive on
‘12.5.72’
. He did not say at what time. He said that he had seen Mrs Nash’s body five minutes after death and that he had performed a
‘complete’
examination of it. The cause of death was said to be cerebrovascular accident, as was recorded on the death certificate. The mode of death was said to be
‘coma’
of
‘1-2 hours’
. Shipman’s answers relating to the mode and cause of death were said to be based on his own observations. Shipman recorded that Mrs Nash had been nursed during her last illness by Sister Naylor. He stated that no one was present at the moment of death.
Mrs Naylor has no recollection of the individual circumstances of any of the deaths about which she has been asked, including the death of Mrs Nash. She may have nursed Mrs Nash but it may be that Shipman named Sister Naylor on Form B because she was the person in charge of the nursing staff on Ward 1, and that he did not intend to suggest that she was directly responsible for the care provided to Mrs Nash.
Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain completed cremation Form C. He recorded that he had seen and questioned Shipman and that he had also seen and questioned the nursing staff on Ward 1. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Mrs Higgins is concerned that Shipman stated on Form B that Mrs Nash was in a coma for one to two hours before death. She points out that the family saw Mrs Nash during the evening visiting period which ended at 8pm. There had been no deterioration in her condition. That evening, she appeared to have been in the same condition as she had been for a couple of days prior to her death. Mrs Higgins would not have described her condition as a coma. In her letter dated 29th
September 2004, Mrs Higgins said that she had mixed feelings about her mother’s death. She again questioned why Shipman recorded that her mother was in a coma only for one to two hours when, as she put it:
‘I know full well she never ever came round. To me she was like this for 3 days only showing distress as if she was trying to come round on the 3rd
day. We left her thinking by morning she would be fully round, no one told us she was deteriorating.’
Conclusion
In the absence of any medical records, it is not possible to be certain about Mrs Nash’s condition in the days before her death. However, from the description given by Mrs Higgins, it appears that Mrs Nash suffered a stroke on 9th
May and that she never fully regained consciousness after that time. Dr Aneez Esmail, Medical Advisor to the Inquiry, has advised me that the fact that Mrs Nash was unconscious and did not regain consciousness is a sign of the severity of the stroke that she suffered. The prognosis in such situations is invariably poor and patients are at risk of dying either from a further extension of the stroke or from the risk of other sequelae such as bronchopneumonia. The restlessness was almost certainly a sign of cerebral irritation and was not an indication that she was going to recover. It is therefore entirely possible that Mrs Nash died a natural death on the evening of 12th
May.
Having said that, it must be recognised that Shipman was on duty that evening. If the nurse to whom Mrs Higgins spoke at about 8pm did indeed call a doctor to see Mrs Nash, that doctor would almost certainly have been Shipman. We do not know whether she did call him. It does not seem likely that she would call a doctor just because Mrs Nash needed some water. It is possible that the nurse had noticed some deterioration in Mrs Nash’s condition that the family was unaware of. Cremation Form B suggests that Shipman was called to see her. Shipman claims that he knew, from his own observation, that Mrs Nash had been in a coma for one to two hours. If the death occurred at 8.45pm, that entry suggests that Shipman must have seen Mrs Nash either immediately before visiting time at 7pm or soon after the end of visiting time at 8pm. In the light of the nurse’s indication that she intended to call the doctor, it is more likely that Shipman saw Mrs Nash after 8pm. I infer that he probably did see her soon after 8pm.
It would be usual for a nurse to remain with the doctor while s/he examined and treated the patient. However, I believe that, on occasion, doctors were left alone with patients. I do not know whether this was one such occasion. Nor do I know whether Shipman administered any drug to Mrs Nash. He could have done. She might then have been found dead some time later by the nursing staff and Shipman would have been called back to certify the fact that she had died.
Professor Richard Baker’s review has shown that an unusually high proportion of the deaths whose cause was certified by Shipman took place during the evening. That gives rise to a suspicion that he killed some patients during that time. I cannot say whether or not Mrs Nash was one of those. All I can say is that it appears that Shipman saw Mrs Nash shortly before her death and may have had the opportunity to give her something which hastened her death. There are grounds for some suspicion but that is all.
I very much regret that I have had to raise these doubts so many years after the death and I am sorry for the distress this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001