The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Enid Otter
Introduction
Mrs Enid Otter was found dead at her home, 21 Waverley Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 30th
September 1997 at the age of 77. Mrs Otter's death is entered in the register of deaths as having occurred on Monday, 29th
September 1997 and I have concluded, from the evidence available, that this is when she died. She had been a patient of Shipman for only six months at the time of her death. He certified that the cause of her death was congestive heart failure due to hypertension.
The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs Otter's death was one of a number recovered by the police from the register office in August 1998. After a preliminary assessment, the police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Michael Otter (Mrs Otter's son), Mrs Dorothy Heywood (a friend and neighbour of Mrs Otter) and Mrs May Mulligan (also a neighbour). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville and obtained telephone billing records.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Otter. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mr Otter and Mrs Heywood. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Otter's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained two reports from Dr Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without a full oral hearing, although Dr Grenville gave oral evidence on Friday, 7th
December 2001.
Personal Background
Mrs Otter was widowed six months before she died. She was deeply distressed and for a time underwent counselling. Her son, Mr Michael Otter, lived close by and used to call on her several times a week. Mrs Heywood would also visit Mrs Otter about three times a week. According to Mrs Heywood, Mrs Otter was able to do her own shopping, although she liked to use the 'ring and ride' service to take her into Hyde.
Mrs Otter suffered from diabetes and hypertension. According to her son, she had good health and had never been admitted to hospital. To his knowledge, she had never had any heart complaints. The hospital records show that she was admitted only once following an accident in 1985. She attended the diabetes out-patient clinic. Until the day of her death, neither the general practitioner nor hospital records reveal any evidence of a cardiac problem. The computerised surgery records confirm that Mrs Otter was treated for hypertension and diabetes.
Found within Mrs Otter's medical records was a letter addressed to Shipman, from The Tameside Therapy Centre, dated 13th
August 1997. It reads as follows:
'Enid is now coping with the death of her husband very well. She gets out a lot, has lots of friends and good family. She has booked a holiday for the end of September and has a brilliant attitude.
She is much more settled now you have taken her on your list - she was very upset at her previous GP and felt she had no confidence in him. However, you have turned that round for her and she trusts you implicitly and is no longer afraid of the consequences of her being ill.
I do not need to see her again'
.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
Mrs Otter went to North Wales for a week's holiday on Saturday, 20th
September 1997. While she was there, she felt unwell and consulted a doctor in Rhos-on-Sea. The temporary services card found within Mrs Otter's Lloyd George notes records a diagnosis of phlebitis in the right leg (an inflammation of the veins in the leg). Mrs Otter returned home on Saturday, 27th
September as scheduled and the holiday was not cut short.
On Sunday, 28th
September at about 11am, Mrs Heywood took some soup round for Mrs Otter, which she ate while Mrs Heywood was still at the house. Mrs Otter told Mrs Heywood that she had been ill while she was on holiday. She said she had had chest pain and swollen feet. Mrs Heywood suggested that she should contact Shipman and ask him to visit the next day. Mr Otter also visited his mother on the Sunday, and he recalls that she was suffering from swollen feet but was otherwise happy and refreshed following her holiday.
The Day of the Death
It appears from the telephone billing records that Mrs Otter made two telephone calls on Monday, 29th
September. The first, made at 8.42am, was to Shipman's surgery. The visits book suggests that Mrs Otter had requested a visit. The entry reads:
'Enid Otter...legs swollen + inflamed - very painful'
. A visits slip contained within Mrs Otter's Lloyd George notes records as follows:
'legs very inflamed, very painful swollen, can't get shoes on'
. Mrs Otter's second telephone call, made at 10.40am, was to a Mrs Jean Tudor, a courier for a catalogue company. No further calls were charged to Mrs Otter's account until the following day.
Mrs Mulligan told the police that she saw Shipman arriving at Mrs Otter's home at about 11am. She saw Mrs Otter opening the door to let him in. About 15 minutes later, she noticed that his car was no longer outside Mrs Otter's house. She had not seen him leave.
Mrs Mulligan's estimate of the time of Shipman's visit is unlikely to be entirely accurate. The surgery appointments sheet shows that he would have been unlikely to leave the surgery until about 11.15am or even a little later. However, when he left, he would have been free to carry out his visits until he was due back for afternoon surgery, which began at 4pm.
An entry in Mrs Otter's Lloyd George notes for 29th
September records as follows:
'V
(
visit
)
Been on holiday swollen legs
given Erythromycin
(
an antibiotic
)
and Bendrofluazide
(
a diuretic
)
Oedema to knee
190/100 HS gallop rhythm
JVP
liver enlarged 2 fb
LASIX 80mg OD'
.
The entry then continues on another card:
'V increase the enalapril
40mg 20mg o/n
Chat re hospital admission
“not breathless” “happy to stay
at home”
to LUK if worse overnight
review mane'
.
Dr Grenville interpreted this note to suggest that Mrs Otter told Shipman that she had had swollen legs while on holiday and had been given medication. On examination on 29th
September, Shipman claimed to find the legs swollen to the knee. The blood pressure was raised at 190/100. The heart sounds were in gallop rhythm. The jugular venous pressure was raised. The liver was enlarged and was palpable to the extent of two fingers' breadth. These signs (if genuine) represented severe heart failure. Shipman prescribed 80mg Lasix per day. He increased Mrs Otter's dosage of enalapril. He 'chatted' to her about admission to hospital but Mrs Otter apparently said that she was not breathless and was happy to stay at home. She was to let him know if she was worse overnight. He would review her in the morning.
Shipman made a computerised note shortly before 4pm that day. This was broadly similar to the manuscript note. It said:
'Congestive heart failure
oedema to knees gallop rhythm hs 13/6 murmur 2jvp up liver enlarged
chat re problem says not breathless on enalapril 40 increase to 60 to
use lasix 80 od see morne tluk.
29/09/97'
.
According to Mrs Heywood, another neighbour, Mrs Joan Shedwick, told her the following day that she had been unable to elicit a response from Mrs Otter at about 4pm. She had been in her garden and had called out to attract Mrs Otter's attention. There was no response and Mrs Shedwick assumed that she was in the kitchen and unable to hear.
Just before 7pm that evening, Mrs Heywood knocked on Mrs Otter's door, but there was no reply. She assumed that Mrs Otter was visiting Mrs Swindles, another neighbour, as she often did on a Monday evening.
The Events of the Day after the Death
At about 9.45am on 30th
September, Mrs Heywood called on Mrs Otter but there was no reply. She spoke to Mr and Mrs Mulligan who told her that Shipman had visited Mrs Otter at about lunchtime the day before. Mrs Heywood then went to Shipman's surgery and asked the receptionist, Mrs Carol Chapman, whether Mrs Otter had been taken to hospital. Mrs Chapman said that she did not know and summoned Shipman. He told Mrs Heywood to go back to Mrs Otter's home and see if she could get in via the French window at the back. He said that he thought Mrs Heywood was in the habit of leaving her back door on the chain. Mrs Heywood agreed to telephone Shipman when she had gained access to the house. She then returned to Mrs Otter's home and, with the help of Mrs Shedwick's son-in-law, Mr Nick Robinson, she opened the French window, which was unlocked but chained, by reaching in and releasing the chain.
Mrs Heywood found Mrs Otter sitting in her armchair in the living room, her head resting to the left and her hands held together in front of her. She had the appearance of being asleep, although Mrs Heywood realised that she had died.
Mrs Heywood telephoned the Market Street Surgery and told Mrs Chapman that Mrs Otter had died. Mrs Chapman spoke to Shipman and then told Mrs Heywood that Shipman would be at the house within ten minutes. While waiting for Shipman to arrive, Mrs Heywood noticed that the house was very warm. In the kitchen, she found that the oven was on low and a pasty, which had been left inside, was completely burned so that it looked like charcoal. Mrs Heywood suggests that Mrs Otter might eat a pasty for tea or as an evening meal. Alternatively, she sometimes had a very early lunch at about 11am and would then eat in the mid-afternoon. Mrs Heywood thinks it possible that Mrs Otter might have planned to eat the pasty once Shipman had left.
The curtains in the house were open. When Mrs Heywood answered the door to Shipman, she noticed that the front door was unlocked. This was most unusual. Mrs Otter was very conscious of security and the front door was usually kept locked, even while she was in.
Shipman came into the house, put the back of his hand to Mrs Otter's neck and said something about 'rigor'. He said that Mrs Otter had died at about 10pm the previous evening. He then picked up some tablets and said, 'This is what the doctor in Rhos-on-Sea gave her. Just water tablets'. He said that they would not have helped Mrs Otter, as she had had a heart attack. He then put the tablets in his pocket. Mrs Heywood had the impression that Shipman was suggesting that Mrs Otter had had a mild heart attack while she was on holiday and that the doctor in Rhos-on-Sea had not fully prescribed appropriate treatment and she had had another heart attack and died.
Shipman made a handwritten note as follows:
'Called to see her.
Certified dead 11.45
Rigor set in dead 12 hrs.
bed disturbed/sat in chair
CHF Hypertension diabetes M'
.
This entry suggests that Shipman was called to the house at 11.45am and found Mrs Otter dead. Rigor mortis was present and he estimated that she had been dead for 12 hours. The bed was disturbed but Mrs Otter was found sitting in her chair. He attributed the death to congestive heart failure, hypertension and diabetes mellitus.
The corresponding entry on the computer says:
'O/E dead.
chf bp diabetes neighbour present'
.
This entry suggests that a neighbour was present at the death.
Certification
Shipman completed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death. He said that the cause of death was congestive heart failure due to hypertension. Diabetes mellitus was said to have contributed to the death. He said that he had seen Mrs Otter on the day of her death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation forms. He said that the time of death was
'about 2200 hours'
. He said he had been Mrs Otter's ordinary medical attendant for five months and had attended her during her last illness for 24 hours. He said that he had last seen Mrs Otter alive about eight hours before death and had seen the body about 12 hours after it. The mode of death is recorded as coma of a
'couple of hours'
duration. He said that his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on statements made by Mrs Heywood, a neighbour, who, he said, was present at the moment of death. Mrs Heywood was not aware that Shipman had said that she was present at the death or that she had known about the manner of Mrs Otter's death.
The Aftermath
About three weeks after Mrs Otter's death, Mrs Heywood called on Shipman and expressed concern about the fact that the house had been insecure, the curtains had been open, and food had been left in the oven to burn. She felt that all these things were inconsistent with Mrs Otter having died at 10pm. Shipman reassured Mrs Heywood by saying that Mrs Otter could well have had a heart attack and then lapsed into a coma, before dying at about 10pm.
Mr Otter also went to see Shipman. Shipman told him that he had seen Mrs Otter on the morning of 29th
September and that he thought she had died some time that evening. Shipman also said that swelling of the feet was a symptom of heart disease and Mrs Otter may well have had a mild heart attack. Shipman said that he was surprised at Mrs Otter's death as he thought that she had about another six months to live. This surprised Mr Otter, who was unaware that his mother was unwell, or that she had such a short life expectancy.
The Expert Evidence
In his police statement, Dr Grenville noted Mrs Otter's history of diabetes and hypertension and the treatment she had received. He also observed that Mrs Otter was treated for phlebitis while on holiday the week before her death. He noted that Mrs Otter had told Mrs Heywood that her legs had been swollen and thought that this might indicate a degree of cardiac failure secondary to the inflammation.
Dr Grenville said that, if the entries Shipman made in Mrs Otter's Lloyd George and computerised medical records for 29th
September were genuine, it would appear that Mrs Otter had developed severe cardiac failure. However, the picture presented by Shipman in the note is of a very sick woman and is inconsistent with the impression gained by Mrs Heywood and Mr Otter.
Dr Grenville noted that Shipman had lied on Form B by saying that Mrs Heywood was present at the death. He noted that Shipman had claimed to be able to assess the time of death from the fact that rigor mortis was present. That claim was spurious, as it is not possible to make such an assessment. He also said that Mrs Otter's position and appearance in death were not typical of a patient who had died of congestive heart failure. A death from this condition is not rapid and he would have expected her to telephone for assistance. Nor was her appearance wholly consistent with death from cardiac arrhythmia, which he suggested was a possible mechanism of death, if Mrs Otter had been in severe heart failure. It was, however, typical of the appearance of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of opiate.
In his report to the Inquiry, Dr Grenville again acknowledged the possibility that Mrs Otter was suffering from congestive heart failure, but the fact that her legs were described as
'painful and inflamed'
led him to the conclusion that it was more likely that she was suffering a recurrence of the phlebitis. Dr Grenville added that the sequence of events surrounding the death, described by Shipman in his conversation with Mrs Heywood, was highly unlikely to have occurred.
Conclusion
There are a number of highly suspicious factors surrounding this death. The first is that the death was discovered not long after a visit by Shipman. There is a close temporal link between his visit and her death. Shipman visited Mrs Otter at approximately midday on 29th
September. He was the last person to speak to or see Mrs Otter alive. It appears that Mrs Shedwick was unable to attract her attention at about 4pm and, when Mrs Heywood visited just before 7pm, there was no answer at the door. Mrs Otter did not make telephone contact with her son, as she would have done had she been feeling unwell. According to Dr Grenville, had Mrs Otter suffered severe cardiac failure it is likely that she still would have had an opportunity to do so. Her telephone was not used after 10.40am on the day of the death. The temporal link excites a high degree of suspicion.
Although Shipman certified that the death was due to congestive heart failure, there is little independent evidence that she had that condition. In the week before she died, but not before, Mrs Otter exhibited some of the signs and symptoms of heart failure. However, the doctor in Rhos-on-Sea thought she had phlebitis and the record of that consultation does not refer to chest pain. In her statement to the police, Mrs Heywood said that Mrs Otter had told her that while away, she suffered from chest pains and very swollen feet. She did not repeat that, assertion in her statement to the Inquiry. Mr Otter does not remember his mother saying that she had had chest pain while on holiday. Dr Grenville is of the opinion that, as Mrs Otter requested a visit because her legs were swollen, painful and inflamed, the swelling was consistent with a recurrence of phlebitis, and not necessarily indicative of congestive heart failure. If Mrs Otter were not showing clear signs of congestive heart failure on 28th
September, when Mrs Heywood last saw her, she would have been unlikely to die of it the following day.
Shortly before her death, it appears that Mrs Otter felt well enough to eat, as she had left a pasty in the oven. This factor does not necessarily assist in a determination of the time of death, as Mrs Otter might have planned to eat a pasty for lunch or in the mid-afternoon or for her evening meal. However, it is not consistent with a death at 10pm, as suggested by Shipman, even if the death had been preceded by a coma of two hours. That the curtains were open and the pasty in the oven suggests, but does not prove, that the death occurred much earlier than 10pm.
Mrs Heywood says that she noticed that the front door was unlocked when Shipman arrived on 30th
September. It would appear that she herself had not tried the front door when she called on Mrs Otter at about 9.45am. At the surgery, Shipman had suggested to her that she should try to gain access via the back doors, which suggests either that Mrs Heywood had told Shipman that she had tried the door and could not gain access or that Shipman was anxious to suggest that entry be made by the back doors as he knew that Mrs Heywood might be puzzled if the front door was insecure. If the front door were unlocked, as Mrs Heywood says, it would suggest that someone had left the house after Mrs Otter's death.
The entry in the Lloyd George notes is startlingly similar to many I have seen in cases where Shipman has killed his patient. He starts by recording the true reason for the visit, and then switches to recording findings which he wishes to present in order to explain the death which is about to be discovered. Here, he presented a picture of severe heart failure. There are several suspicious features in this record, in particular the suggestion that Shipman had discussed hospital admission with Mrs Otter, but she preferred to stay at home and would 'let him know' if matters deteriorated. Mrs Heywood is of the opinion that, had Shipman advised Mrs Otter to go to hospital, then she would have done so without hesitation, as she held him in such high regard. Further doubt is cast on this version of events by Shipman's reaction to the news that Mrs Otter was not answering the door when Mrs Heywood called at the surgery the following day. If, on the previous day, Mrs Otter had genuinely presented with symptoms of heart failure serious enough to warrant hospital admission, then the fact that she was not answering her door would have given real cause for concern. His reaction was more consistent with his knowledge that she was dead, than a belief that she might need urgent medical attention. It appears to me highly likely that Shipman's record of the consultation on 29th
September was fabricated for the purpose of explaining her death.
Shipman recorded on Form B of the cremation certificate that Mrs Heywood was present at the moment of Mrs Otter's death. It is clear from her statement that she was not. Whilst it is possible that this was a genuinely mistaken entry, the far more plausible explanation is that it was an attempt by Shipman to deflect any suspicion that the countersigning doctor and medical referee might have had when examining cremation Form B.
The position in which Mrs Otter was found is inconsistent with the stated cause of death but consistent with the administration of a lethal dose of opiates.
Taking all these factors into account, I am sure that Shipman was responsible for Mrs Otter's death. I think it highly likely that he killed her using his usual method, a lethal injection of diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001