The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Renate Eldtraude Overton
Introduction
Mrs Renate Eldtraude (also Edeltraude) Overton died in Tameside General Hospital on Friday, 21st
April 1995 at the age of 47. She had been a patient of Shipman since 1983 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him but her daughter believes that Shipman sometimes found Mrs Overton a nuisance. The case is unusual because about 14 months passed between the day on which Shipman last saw and treated Mrs Overton and the day of her death. She lost consciousness in his presence on Friday, 18th
February 1994 and remained in a persistent vegetative state until her death in April 1995. Following a post-mortem examination without inquest, on 4th
May 1995 the South Manchester Coroner, Mr Peter Revington, certified that the cause of her death was hypoxic cerebral degeneration.
In October 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Dr Michael Andrew Overton (Mrs Overton's brother) expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of his sister's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Dr Overton, Mrs Sharon Renate Carrington (née Young, Mrs Overton's daughter), Mrs Christel Hilde Overton (Mrs Overton's mother), Mr Michael Jeremy Smith and Mr Neil David Harrop (paramedics), and Staff Nurse Karen Taylor, Dr Siong Sih Lee, Dr Li Cher Loh, Dr Chithambaram Veerapan, Dr Geraint Ceri Stewart Brown and Dr David Lyle Bee (all nursing and medical staff at Tameside General Hospital). They also took two statements from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Overton but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Carrington, Dr Overton, Mrs Christel Overton, Mr Smith, Mr Harrop and Dr Brown. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Overton's general practitioner, hospital and ambulance records, to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period and to the coroner's documentation. The Inquiry has also obtained a further report from Dr Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Overton was a cigarette smoker and there is evidence that she drank heavily. She had poor health and suffered from asthma, hypothyroidism, epilepsy, anxiety and depression. Her brother has told the Inquiry that she was a regular visitor to the doctor's surgery and her medical records confirm this.
Mrs Overton was admitted to Stepping Hill Hospital, Stockport on 18th
November 1990, with a history of increasing shortness of breath and wheezing. She was said to have had a mild asthmatic attack. In due course she was prescribed terbutaline and Pulmicort. On that regime it appears that her asthma was well controlled.
There is no evidence in Mrs Overton's medical records that she suffered from any symptoms suggestive of ischaemic heart disease before 10th
February 1994. On that date, according to the handwritten records, Mrs Overton attended the surgery for a routine asthma check, almost certainly with the practice nurse. The note suggests that while there she also complained of a heavy feeling in her chest, numbness in her left arm and shortness of breath. It appears that Shipman was either told of this or saw Mrs Overton and prescribed Tildiem, an anti-anginal and anti-hypertensive drug. The words
'Tildiem 60mg 1 TDS'
seem to be written in Shipman's hand. There is a corresponding entry in the computerised records dated 10th
February, describing chest pain and a prescription of Tildiem. Shipman added no further details to the history, recorded no examination and arranged no investigation. Dr Grenville says that it appears that Shipman had jumped to the conclusion that Mrs Overton was suffering ischaemic heart disease without instigating any proper investigation.
The medical records contain numerous references to allergies to various substances. There is a medical summary card on which Shipman recorded that Mrs Overton was allergic to Fortral, pethidine and Fentazin, although it is unclear when this entry was made. The computerised records contain references to these and other allergies which are also recorded on the Lloyd George envelope. In a letter Shipman wrote to Tameside General Hospital on 4th
September 1987, he mentioned an allergy to pethidine and morphine. There are no recorded entries of any episodes of demonstrated allergy to any of these pharmaceuticals but it is improbable that Shipman invented them as long ago as 1987, so it seems likely that there is some factual basis for them.
The Events of Friday, 18th
February 1994
In February 1994, Mrs Overton was living with Mrs Carrington. At about 8pm on Friday, 18th
February, Mrs Overton returned home after having been out drinking in Hyde. From her demeanour she appeared to have consumed quite a lot of alcohol and she was wheezing quite badly. Mrs Overton telephoned Shipman because of her breathing. Mrs Carrington was not unduly concerned because the breathing difficulties did not appear very serious.
Shipman arrived within about half an hour. Mrs Carrington recalls that he had his bag and a nebuliser with him and she showed him into the front room where her mother was waiting. Mrs Carrington remembers that Shipman got her mother to breathe through the nebuliser. Mrs Carrington then decided to leave her mother alone with Shipman because she could see no need to remain with them any longer. As she left, she said that she would be upstairs if she were to be needed. She went up to her bedroom and closed the door.
Between 10 and 15 minutes later, Mrs Carrington heard Shipman banging on the bannister and shouting for her to come downstairs quickly. Mrs Carrington came onto the landing and saw Shipman at the foot of the stairs. She went downstairs and followed him into the front room where she saw her mother lying on her back on the floor. She appeared to be unconscious and gasping for air. Mrs Carrington recalls that Shipman asked her to perform mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and while she did that, Shipman gave cardiac massage.
Shipman and Mrs Carrington continued in this way for a couple of minutes until Shipman reached into his bag and took out a needle and syringe. Mrs Carrington asked Shipman what he was intending to inject. She cannot now recall Shipman's exact response but he said either that it was morphine or that it was adrenaline. He said that it was to ease Mrs Overton's breathing. He proceeded to inject the contents of the syringe into the crook of Mrs Overton's left arm. Within moments of the injection, Mrs Overton seemed to stop gasping for air and to stop breathing altogether. Shipman instructed Mrs Carrington to telephone for an ambulance. She left the room to make the telephone call and could not see what Shipman did during that short period. She recalls that he shouted to her, 'Tell them she's gone into respiratory arrest'. When she returned to the front room, Mrs Carrington continued with mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and Shipman continued with cardiac massage.
According to Mrs Carrington, the paramedics arrived within a few minutes. The Greater Manchester Emergency and Paramedic Service Patient Report Form reveals that the ambulance attended the scene at 9.40pm after receiving the message to attend Mrs Overton's house at 9.33pm. Mr Smith recalls that he saw Mrs Overton lying on her back on the floor. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was in progress. Shipman explained that he had been called out to see Mrs Overton because she was suffering an asthma attack. He said that whilst he was with her she started to complain of chest pain and that he suspected she was suffering a heart attack. He said that he had administered morphine because of her pain. Mr Smith particularly remembers this because he knew that morphine was a respiratory depressant and he would not expect it to be used on an asthmatic. Mr Harrop remembers that he thought at the time that it was unusual for Shipman to have administered morphine to a patient with breathing difficulties.
The paramedics ventilated and defibrillated Mrs Overton. Her heart began to beat. The paramedics administered lignocaine and adrenaline. Even after Mr Smith explained that he had found a pulse, Shipman kept asking the paramedics to 'shock' Mrs Overton again. According to Dr Grenville, they were right to refuse. He thinks that by that time Shipman was panicking. Although the paramedics were successful in restoring a heartbeat, Mrs Overton remained in respiratory arrest and did not start breathing independently.
Shipman's handwritten note for 18th
February 1994 is unusually extensive and reads as follows:
'V
(
visit
)
Called at 8.50.
arrived 9.15 - Acute Asthma
given nebuliser
Pulmicort nebul. x 1
Ventolin nebul x 5ml.
BP 150/100. HR 120/m
Resp > 30.
After nebuliser A/E = BS good
not cyanosed
Approx 9.30 collapsed C/O chest
pain sweating
pulse thready
given IV diamorphine 10mg stat (only
dose in bag)
Settled then ?arrested
Laid down ECM x 5
Daughter called
MTM/established patient
ECM/
not
cyanosed
pupils dilated fixed
Ambulance called. pupils dilated
ECM/
MTM/ maintained
15 mins Ambulance crew IV Adrenaline
IV Lignocaine. Intubated
pink
pupils fixed dilated'
.
Then, continued on a separate sheet:
'H/R. established output OK
(
illegible
)
No
respiration established
TGH
CAS S/N informed of arrival
diagnosis
Rx'
.
Dr Grenville has interpreted this note. It suggests that when Shipman arrived at 9.15pm he found Mrs Overton suffering an acute asthma attack. He gave Pulmicort and Ventolin through a nebuliser. A nebuliser is a portable air compressor which delivers drugs to the lungs by passing air through a solution of the drug in a nebulising chamber and converting it into a fine mist which is then inhaled by the patient through a mask. This is an extremely effective way of giving drugs to a patient, especially when they are having an acute asthmatic attack when their co-ordination and respiratory effort are often insufficient to allow them to use ordinary inhalers. Shipman recorded that Mrs Overton's blood pressure was 150/100 and that her heart rate was 120 per minute. Her respiratory rate is recorded as greater than 30. The note states that after the nebuliser Mrs Overton's air entry was equal on both sides and the breath sounds were good. She was not cyanosed. This represents a good response to the nebuliser.
The note then states that at approximately 9.30pm Mrs Overton collapsed complaining of chest pain. She was sweating profusely and her pulse was thready. Shipman's response was apparently to give Mrs Overton 10mg of intravenous diamorphine, which, he noted, was the only dose available in his bag. If that were intended to be an excuse for giving a larger than appropriate dose, it would not be a satisfactory one. Even though the doctor might load a large dose into the syringe, he would not need to inject it all. When giving an opiate for the relief of cardiac pain, the injection should be given slowly and should be stopped as soon as the desired effect has been achieved. Consideration of the handwritten record would suggest that Shipman had originally written not diamorphine but morphine. The note continues that Mrs Overton settled but then
'arrested'
which would suggest that her heartbeat and respiration stopped. The rest of the note describes Shipman's attempts to resuscitate Mrs Overton, his calling of her daughter and the arrival of the ambulance crew. There are three references in the note to Mrs Overton's pupils being dilated or fixed and dilated.
It would seem from the last two lines of the note that Shipman himself contacted the casualty department of the hospital and told them of Mrs Overton's imminent arrival, the diagnosis and the treatment he had given. Mr Harrop remembers that as he relayed the history to the casualty staff they told him that Shipman was on the telephone inquiring as to Mrs Overton's well-being. He remembers that there was discussion amongst the staff not about the fact that morphine had been given but about the fact that it was given in such a large dose.
The Paramedic Report Form shows that Mrs Overton arrived at hospital at 10.11pm. On arrival, the receptionist told the paramedics that Shipman had been in touch with the hospital wanting to find out what was happening. The triage nurse on duty that evening, Mrs Karen Taylor, recorded the following history on arrival at 10.12pm:
'H/O asthma attack
SB GP at home
given nebuliser
Pulmicort + Ventolin
after neb Pt
went into cardiac
arrest.
O/A Intubated i/c
output
Given morphine by
GP'
.
When spoken to by the police, Mrs Taylor was unable to recall where she received the information relating to morphine. She believes that she must have been told this by the paramedics and says that one of her duties involved gaining as much information as possible surrounding the circumstances of a patient's admission. She thinks that if Shipman had telephoned in with any information, the fact that he did so would have been recorded in the notes.
Mrs Overton was initially treated in the accident and emergency department by Dr Lee, who noted what he must have been told and what he observed at the time of her admission. The relevant part of his note reads:
'asthmatic
H/O (?MI previously)
Asthmatic attack (SOB and wheezy)
Respiratory arrest
cardiac arrest
VF
D/C Shocked into SR
Adrenaline x 1
Lignocaine x 1 by Paramedic
No chest pain before collapsing
given morphine 20mg IV by GP'
.
This suggests that Mrs Overton was a known asthmatic who had possibly suffered a myocardial infarction in the past. She had been brought to the casualty department by the paramedics following an asthma attack which was followed by cardio-respiratory arrest at her home. Her general practitioner administered 20mg morphine intravenously. The paramedics restored spontaneous respiration by electric shock and drug treatment.
Dr Lee administered 400mg naloxone, the antidote to morphine, and Mrs Overton was transferred to the intensive treatment unit in a critical condition. Dr Lee told the police that he recalled that Shipman telephoned the casualty department and informed a member of staff that he had administered 20mg morphine to Mrs Overton. Dr Lee proffered to the police the view that the administration of morphine would be an inappropriate treatment for someone suffering an asthma attack and that 5mg and not 20mg morphine would be appropriate for someone in heart failure. Dr Loh, another doctor involved in Mrs Overton's treatment, told the police that he felt at the time that her respiratory and cardiac arrest had been precipitated by the intravenous injection of morphine.
The nursing notes for 18th
February read as follows:
'Emergency admission via A
E.
Called emergency GP this evening.
Extremely breathless. Had nebs x 2.
daughter says felt easier. GP says Renate
c/o chest pain Morphine 20 mg given
IV. Paramedics arrived. Resp arrest
V.F. on monitor intubated
ventilated
D.C. Shock x 2 200 joules
SR.
On arrival to A+E Unconscious.
pupils fixed +
dilated
Pinpoint. Naloxone
given i/c no response. ECG - not significant.
Transferred to unit. Attached
to Puritan Bennet Ventilator
Settings: FIO2 70% Resp rate 12
TV 700ml. Not sedated. No
resp effort. Cough reflex on
E T Suction.
Vital signs:- NIBP 102/68 MMHG
O2 Sat 98 - 100%
Sinus rhythm 68bpm. Temp. 33o C
axilla.
Pupils fixed. Size 1.
S A Millward'
.
A second entry reads as follows:
'18/2/94 T 10.45 CAS Rang - S/N
? dose of diamorphine at time
No established respiration yet'
.
This would suggest that the staff nurse from the casualty department of the hospital telephoned Shipman to ask what dosage of diamorphine he had given. It is most likely that it was Shipman, therefore, who was the source of the information in Nurse Millward's note that he had given 20mg morphine (albeit he himself noted that it was 10mg diamorphine and not 20mg morphine that was given).
The Aftermath
Mrs Overton did not require sedation during the night of 18th
February 1994. The following morning, however, she suffered grand mal seizures, which were eventually brought under control. Mrs Overton was started on sedative drugs because of the possibility of cerebral oedema. Artificial ventilation was continued for the duration of the weekend.
At some stage, probably during this first weekend, the family members were told that Mrs Overton had suffered irreversible brain damage. Mrs Overton's brother, who is a medical practitioner, recalls that an anaesthetist, believed to be Dr Brown, asked him if he understood the implications of giving morphine to a patient who had had an asthma attack. Dr Overton said that he did, meaning that he understood that morphine should not be given to a patient with asthma. The family subsequently decided that they did not wish to make a complaint about Shipman's treatment of Mrs Overton. Also, for reasons that will be fully investigated in Phase 2 of the Inquiry, no complaint was made by any member of the medical staff and there was no investigation into the occurrence.
On the morning of Monday, 21st
February 1994, Dr Brown reviewed Mrs Overton's progress. He noted that the convulsions had been controlled. He diagnosed severe brain damage due to the cardiac arrest on the Friday night. Dr Brown subsequently told the police that he was surprised that there had never been any sign of an asthmatic process from the time of Mrs Overton's first arrival in casualty. He also told the police that her cardiovascular system was quite stable, which was not indicative of a myocardial infarction. Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry, has examined the hospital records and has concluded that there is little clinical evidence that Mrs Overton suffered a heart attack on the evening of 18th
February. Neither the electrocardiogram, the results of enzyme tests nor the clinical signs were suggestive of a heart attack. Moreover, from my examination of the records it does not appear that Mrs Overton received any treatment for asthma.
Mrs Overton remained in a persistent vegetative state. She never regained consciousness and died in hospital on 21st
April 1995. The death was referred to the South Manchester Coroner, who was then Mr Revington, and the Inquiry has copies of the documentation held by him. The post-mortem examination was carried out by Dr Bee. In the section of the Post-Mortem Examination Report headed
'Pericardium'
, Dr Bee noted that the heart weighed 254 grammes, and observed that there was
'mild atheroma of the coronary circulation'
. This demonstrates that Mrs Overton was not suffering from ischaemic heart disease and had not had a heart attack the previous year as Shipman had claimed. Dr Bee considered that the cause of death was
'Hypoxic cerebral degeneration'
. However, under the section headed
'Cause of Death'
in the Report of Death to HM Coroner the following appears:
'1
(a)
Persistent vegetative state
(b)
Respiratory Arrest
(c)
Asthmatic and morphine administration'
.
There is then written an alternative cause 1(a) with no background causes:
'1a Hypoxic cerebral degeneration'
.
Thus, it appears that there was information before the coroner to suggest that Mrs Overton's death had been caused by the administration of morphine to an asthmatic. Dr Bee told the police that he did not recall whether he had been made aware of any treatment history before he did the post-mortem examination.
The Report of Death to HM Coroner contains a brief note that Mrs Overton was admitted to hospital on 18th
February 1994 after a respiratory arrest. She had been in a coma for over a year. Then appear the words:
'Ask Terry to check'
. Within the coroner's file is a note recording a message from Ms Terry King who, in April 1995, was the coroner's officer based at Tameside General Hospital. The message reads as follows:
'Re: Renate OVERTON deceased
25.4.95
'Message from Terry King
'Dr Shipman told her that over a year ago he was called to see the patient as she was having an asthma attack. He stabilised her and then went upstairs to tell her daughter that she would probably need some Hydrocortisone. When he returned he found the patient flat on the floor - he commenced resuscitation and an ambulance was called. He was just about to cease resus. when the ambulance arrived and the ambulance men found a bleep on the machine. They managed to get a beat but in Dr. Shipman's opinion she was at that time brain dead. She has been in a coma since.
'Dr Shipman does not feel there was anything perculiar
(
sic
)
. She had had some emotional problems in the past but everything seemed to be okay at the time'
.
I note that this message contains no reference to morphine or diamorphine and that Shipman apparently said that it was during his temporary absence upstairs that Mrs Overton collapsed. The coroner did not hold an inquest but certified the sole cause of death as hypoxic cerebral degeneration.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville is of the opinion that Mrs Overton's death was directly caused by an injection of a strong opiate. In his view, Shipman was, at best, highly negligent in giving an injection of morphine or diamorphine to Mrs Overton in the circumstances in which he found her on 18th February 1994. He has told the Inquiry that it was inappropriate for Shipman to have administered an injection of an opiate. At page 5 of his report he says:
'Mrs Carrington describes her mother as appearing unconscious at . . .
(
the time she received the injection
)
. She would not, therefore, have been experiencing pain and there would have been no indication for administering an opiate. There is a possibility that Mrs Overton may have suffered chest pain after her asthma attack and, in fact, it is not uncommon for patients to complain of pains in their chest following the extreme muscular exertion required in the chest wall during an asthmatic attack. It is also theoretically possible that the stress of the asthmatic attack induced angina or even a heart attack if, indeed, Mrs Overton had recently begun to exhibit the symptoms of ischaemic heart disease. Nevertheless, I reiterate the view contained in my previous statement that the balance of risk and benefit to Mrs Overton of giving her an opiate, even if Shipman thought she was having a heart attack, was such that an opiate should not have been given'.
In Dr Grenville's opinion the medical evidence suggests two possibilities:
'Firstly that Mrs Overton did, in fact, develop ischaemic heart disease
(
in early February 1994
)
and Shipman was negligent in instituting treatment without further investigation, and that Mrs Overton then suffered a heart attack following her asthmatic attack on 18th
February and Shipman was again negligent in administering an opiate to her. Secondly, that Shipman planned to murder Mrs Overton, taking advantage of her complaint of chest pain to the practice nurse, to begin constructing a history of ischaemic heart disease and that he then injected her with a smaller dose of opiate than he normally used at a time when he knew that she would be particularly susceptible to the respiratory depressant effects of the drug. The attempt at resuscitation would then be required since Mrs Carrington was in the house and the fact that Mrs Overton's heart was restarted suggests that Shipman may have underestimated the dose required in these circumstances to ensure an immediately fatal outcome'
.
Conclusion
Although Mrs Overton did not enjoy good health, her epilepsy and hypothyroidism were well controlled. There is no mention of any cardiac problem until 10th
February 1994, eight days before Shipman's last visit. She was, however, prone to asthma attacks and plainly suffered such an attack on the evening of 18th
February 1994. Shipman was summoned and applied the conventional treatment to such apparently good effect that Mrs Carrington felt able to retire to her room, no longer concerned about her mother's condition.
I have to consider what happened in the daughter's absence. Shipman claims that Mrs Overton had a heart attack and went into cardiac arrest. It is possible that Shipman decided to kill Mrs Overton and gave her an injection of opiate. If Mrs Carrington is correct and Shipman found her mother a nuisance, it would not be surprising in the light of what we now know about Shipman if he wished to kill her.
It is possible that Shipman believed that Mrs Overton had a recent history of chest pain indicative of angina. The possibility that Mrs Overton's symptoms on 10th
February 1994 were cardiac in origin cannot be definitively confirmed or refuted. Certainly, the symptoms recorded by someone other than Shipman of a heavy feeling in the chest, numbness in the left arm and shortness of breath are compatible with an episode of angina. It is, however, suspicious that Shipman seems not to have instigated any further investigation but jumped to the conclusion that Mrs Overton was suffering ischaemic heart disease. It may be, as Dr Grenville suggests, that Shipman used this chest pain as an excuse to build up a false history of ischaemic heart disease so that he could use it to explain her death when he had killed her. On the other hand, it is at least theoretically possible that Mrs Overton might have developed heart disease and might therefore have been at a substantially increased risk of suffering a heart attack. She was also a heavy smoker, which must have increased her risk of cardiac problems. However, the post-mortem findings suggest that Mrs Overton did not have ischaemic heart disease.
Even if, as Dr Grenville has said is possible, Mrs Overton complained of chest pain following her asthma attack that would not of itself cause her to lose consciousness. The possibility that she had a heart attack and went into cardiac arrest can to all intents and purposes be discounted in the light of the post-mortem examination findings. However, I shall assume for the moment that Mrs Overton either did have a heart attack and did go into cardiac arrest or that for some reason Shipman believed that this is what had happened. In those circumstances, one might expect Shipman to summon Mrs Carrington to help him carry out cardiopulmonary resuscitation. When Mrs Carrington entered the room, her mother was on the floor, unconscious and apparently gasping for breath. That is what one might expect to see in a patient who was in cardiac arrest. Shipman did not immediately tell her to call an ambulance. He told her to start mouth-to-mouth resuscitation while he gave cardiac massage. Mrs Carrington says that after about two minutes of this, Shipman gave an injection. However, Shipman's note suggests that before he called Mrs Carrington he had already given 10mg diamorphine intravenously for cardiac pain. His note does not say that he gave another injection after Mrs Carrington came in. Mrs Carrington does not know whether Shipman had already given one injection before she arrived or whether the one she saw was the only one he gave. Mrs Carrington is not sure whether Shipman said that the injection was of morphine or adrenaline. The effect of the injection was to cause Mrs Overton to stop gasping for breath and to stop breathing altogether. It is clear that that injection must have been morphine or diamorphine rather than adrenaline, although I think it quite likely that Shipman told Mrs Carrington that he had given adrenaline. Adrenaline would have been an appropriate drug for a patient in cardiac arrest. Morphine was completely inappropriate for several reasons. First, Mrs Overton was a known asthmatic just recovering from an acute attack and should not have been given any drug which might suppress her respiratory function. Second, if she was unconscious, as she was when Mrs Carrington saw her injected, Mrs Overton could not have been in pain, so no analgesic was called for. Third, Shipman believed Mrs Overton to be allergic to morphine. Whether she really was allergic, we do not know. Even if Mrs Overton had not been an asthmatic with a suspected allergy to morphine and in severe cardiac pain, the dose of diamorphine Shipman claimed to have given was excessive. Of course, we do not know whether the dose was of 10mg diamorphine. It would almost certainly not have been smaller but it might well have been greater, and the hospital notes suggest that 20mg morphine was given. A dose of 10mg diamorphine might have been lethal for Mrs Overton, although it would not be for most women of her age. There is a real possibility that Shipman gave more than 10mg. It would appear that by the time the paramedics arrived, seven minutes after the telephone call summoning them, Mrs Overton was almost dead. There can be no doubt that whatever happened before Mrs Carrington returned, Shipman's action in giving an injection of diamorphine when Mrs Overton was unconscious was grossly negligent and caused or materially contributed to her death. It was therefore probably unlawful even if Shipman did not intend to kill her.
I return to the two possible explanations for Mrs Overton's comatose state on the floor when her daughter returned to the room. The first is that Shipman decided to kill her and gave her an injection of opiate which rendered her unconscious. A factor that might point against that is Mrs Carrington's description of her mother 'gasping for air'. I am unsure what Mrs Carrington means by this. I note Mrs Carrington gave her mother mouth-to-mouth resuscitation which would seem inappropriate or even impossible if she was 'gasping' for breath. The effect of opiate would be to slow the breathing rate. If the breathing had slowed to a dangerous extent, mouth-to-mouth resuscitation would be appropriate. I think it likely that the breathing had slowed but that when Mrs Overton took a breath, it made a gasping sound.
The other possible explanation for Mrs Overton's comatose state is that she had had a heart attack and gone into cardiac arrest. That would account for her gasping for air. There are three reasons why I think she did not have a heart attack. The first is that the post-mortem examination did not reveal any sign that Mrs Overton had had a heart attack or that she had the underlying ischaemic heart disease which might have caused one. Second, the medical tests carried out after Mrs Overton's admission to hospital did not show the results which would have been expected if she had had a heart attack. Third, it would be something of a coincidence that Mrs Overton should have a heart attack in Shipman's presence, even though she had just had an asthma attack. Shipman would have us believe that many of his patients had heart attacks in his presence. Of course most of them did not; he had killed them. I conclude that Mrs Overton did not have a heart attack in Shipman's presence. I think the only sensible explanation for her unconscious state is that Shipman had injected her with diamorphine.
In summary, I think Shipman decided to kill Mrs Overton and gave her an injection of diamorphine which rendered her unconscious. I think he then called Mrs Carrington as he probably felt that he must involve her and make a show of trying to save her mother. She might be suspicious if Mrs Overton were already dead when he called her. It is possible that Shipman did not give as large a dose as he usually gave when killing a patient, or it is possible that Mrs Overton, being more robust than many of his elderly victims, did not die as quickly as he expected. I think he then decided to give a second injection to ensure death. I think he probably told Mrs Carrington that it was adrenaline. I think he delayed in instructing her to call an ambulance until he was satisfied that Mrs Overton would be dead before they arrived. In fact, she was not quite dead and was revived to a limited extent.
I am certain that Shipman caused Mrs Overton's death by an unlawful act and that he did so deliberately rather than negligently. I am almost certain that he killed her in two stages as I have described above.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001