The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Thomas O'Sullivan
Introduction
Mr Thomas O'Sullivan died at his home, 12 Barleycroft Road, Hyde on Monday, 14th
December 1992 at the age of 67. He lived with his wife, Mrs June O'Sullivan. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was coronary thrombosis, due to ischaemic heart disease, resulting from diabetes mellitus.
in January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the information contained in the cremation certificate, Mr O'Sullivan's death was highly suspicious. Professor Baker did not see the medical records. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs June O'Sullivan (Mr O'Sullivan's widow, who has since died), Mrs Kay Evans (his daughter) and Mr William Thomas Wilde (his next door neighbour).
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr O'Sullivan but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has had access to Mr O'Sullivan's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr O'Sullivan was a very healthy man for most of his life. He worked as a welder and rarely visited his doctor. In 1982, he was diagnosed as suffering from diabetes and began to suffer problems with his vision. He retired early. From that time he continued to have trouble with his eyes and later developed other symptoms due to diabetes. In other respects his health was good and he enjoyed tending his large garden. At some time in 1992, he began to suffer from angina. His daughter, Mrs Evans, recalls that the first attack occurred in March. The medical records, which are very sparse indeed, do not contain any reference to angina until much later in the year. There is a letter from a consultant physician at Tameside General Hospital, dated 21st
October 1992, which recommends that Mr O'Sullivan should take soluble aspirin for his angina. In the Lloyd George record cards, there is no entry between 4th
June 1990 and 4th
November 1992. On 4th
November 1992, it is said that Mr O'Sullivan was seen in the diabetic clinic. A separate diabetic record card made on 3rd
November mentions that Mr O'Sullivan had a GTN (glyceryl trinitrate) spray, which would be for use in an angina attack. An entry on 6th
November, in Shipman's writing, says:
'Angina 160/90
GTN PRN
Aspirin 150mg OD
wants his
(
illegible word
)
back'
.
That is the last entry before Mr O'Sullivan's death. It indicates that Mr O'Sullivan complained of angina and was prescribed medication to use in an angina attack and aspirin to thin his blood.
The Day of the Death
On the day of his death, Mr O'Sullivan got up at about 7am. After breakfast he took his granddaughter to school. This was a five minute walk. On his return, at about 9am, he felt unwell and his wife noticed that his face looked grey. He made a cup of coffee and sat down at the dining room table to drink it. Mrs O'Sullivan left the room for a few minutes and, on her return, she found that her husband's eyes were closed and he was frothing at the mouth. He did not respond to her voice. Mrs O'Sullivan called in her neighbour, Mr Wilde, and he suggested that the doctor be summoned. She telephoned Shipman and he promised to come quickly. He arrived about five minutes later. An ambulance arrived soon afterwards. Shipman took Mr O'Sullivan's pulse and told the ambulance man that it was 'too late'. Mr O'Sullivan's daughter arrived. Shipman opened Mr O'Sullivan's eyes and showed the family that the pupils were dilated. He said he was sorry but there was nothing he could do. He said they could collect the death certificate from his surgery.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) is no longer available but the MCCD counterfoil survives and records the cause of death as coronary thrombosis, with diabetes mellitus and ischaemic heart disease as significant contributing conditions. Shipman stated that he had last seen Mr O'Sullivan alive on 4th
December 1992. The register of deaths shows that the cause of death was certified by Shipman as coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease resulting from diabetes mellitus; it is, therefore, not consistent with the MCCD counterfoil. Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said he had last seen Mr O'Sullivan ten days before his death, on 4th
December. That is probably not true. Certainly there is no record of any consultation or communication on that day. He also claimed to have carried out a complete external examination, but this is not confirmed by the witnesses. In all other respects the entries on Form B are consistent with the account of the witnesses.
Conclusion
It appears to me that Professor Baker was suspicious about this death because the entries in Form B are typical of those in many cases in which Shipman had killed his patient. As in so many of the unlawful killings, this was a sudden cardiac death at which Shipman appeared to be present. If Professor Baker had seen the medical records, I think his suspicions would have been further aroused. The records are scanty in the extreme and do not give an adequate background for the diagnosis of angina, which must have been the basis on which Shipman claimed to be satisfied that the cause of death was heart attack. Thus from the records, this case looks suspicious. However, the clear accounts of events given by the family and neighbour demonstrate that this was a natural death. There is no evidence that Shipman had had access to Mr O'Sullivan until he was already on the verge of death. I am quite satisfied that this was a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001