The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Ogden
Introduction
Mrs Mary Ogden died at her home, 36 Grosvenor Crescent, Hyde on Thursday, 17th
October 1985 at the age of 58. She was a patient of Dr Moysey, who practised independently at the Donneybrook Surgery where Shipman also practised. It was Dr Moysey who certified that the cause of Mrs Ogden's death was metastatic carcinoma of the breast.
In February 2000, following Shipman's convictions at Preston Crown Court, Mrs Ogden's husband, Mr Alan Ogden, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of his wife's death. The police investigated the death. They did not take any witness statements but, after speaking to Mr Ogden, they also spoke to Mrs Patricia Hunt, a nursing colleague of Mrs Ogden.
There has been no inquest into Mrs Ogden's death.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Ogden, Mrs Hunt, Dr Moysey and Mrs Joyce Alexander, a friend and nursing colleague of Mrs Ogden. The Inquiry has also had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs Ogden, the cremation forms, Shipman's visits book for 1985 and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer diary. The medical records from the Christie Hospital, where Mrs Ogden was treated for cancer, are available but her general practitioner records have not survived. Dr John Grenville has provided a report.
Mr Ogden gave evidence at an oral hearing on 19th
October 2001 and Mrs Alexander, Mrs Hunt and Dr Grenville gave evidence on 14th
November 2001.
Personal Background
Mrs Ogden was a State Registered Nurse and worked in that capacity until 1980 when she was diagnosed as suffering from carcinoma of the breast. On 21st
May 1980, she underwent an extended right simple mastectomy. In July 1980, she was referred to the Christie Hospital, by which time it was noted that her cancer was not confined to the breast, that it had formed bony lytic metastases in the ribs and lumbar spine, and had infiltrated all lymph nodes. On 28th
July 1980, Mrs Ogden had her ovaries removed, and in September 1980, she underwent local irradiation to her cervical spine. In February 1981, Mrs Ogden began steroid and hormone treatment which continued for the rest of her life. Her symptoms improved with medication and she remained well and free of pain for the remainder of the year.
In 1982, she was feeling tired and had put on weight. She was complaining of dyspepsia, thought to be due to a hiatus hernia. This was brought under control and, although she was often tired, Mrs Ogden was able to enjoy a reasonable quality of life. In December 1982, Dr Wilkinson wrote that recent x-rays showed healing at all known sites of previous disease. Her problems were mechanical and were caused by vertebral collapse in the previously affected areas. This was said to be very encouraging. Mrs Ogden remained well during 1983.
In March 1984, Mrs Ogden was troubled by pain in her neck and x-rays revealed metastatic involvement of two cervical vertebrae. Her pain worsened over the following months but seemed to respond to radiotherapy. In July 1984, she was said to be suffering quite severe lower abdominal pain due to diverticular disease. In late 1984, Mrs Ogden and her husband went to Australia for a few months. While away, she was not well and was in some pain. On 29th
April 1985, after their return, it was noted that she had developed left-sided rib pain due to a pathological fracture. Her medication was changed.
Correspondence within the medical records reveals that, by July 1985, Mrs Ogden's condition was worse. She was said to be suffering generalised bone pain from her known metastases. Her condition did not seem to improve in August, although she remained reasonably well. She was also suffering increased discomfort from her hiatus hernia and, on 13th
September, she was referred to a consultant surgeon, Mr MacLennan, for consideration of operative repair. At the beginning of October, Mr MacLennan performed a diagnostic barium swallow, which confirmed the hiatus hernia. On 7th
October 1985, he wrote to Mrs Ogden explaining that the operation would be technically very difficult and concluded that she should persevere with medicinal treatment. On the same day, he wrote to Dr Wilkinson, Mrs Ogden's physician, from whom the referral had come, telling him that there were other factors militating against a surgical approach. Ultrasound had revealed multiple liver metastases and multiple para-aortic glands. In view of the risk of poor healing and the limited life expectancy, an operation was not advised.
Mr Ogden told the Inquiry that, at this time, he and his wife believed that her cancer had been defeated. She was very well apart from her hiatus hernia. However, I think that Mr Ogden's recollection must be faulty as the Christie Hospital notes record that, on 10th
October 1985, Mr Ogden telephoned the hospital asking for an urgent appointment as his wife was in severe pain. At the appointment the following day, Dr Wilkinson recorded that she was suffering increased pain due to bone metastases. He changed her medication and prescribed intravenous injections of Deca-durabolin, three times weekly. That was Mrs Ogden's last visit to the Christie Hospital before her death six days later.
Mr Ogden recalls the last visit to the Christie Hospital to see Dr Wilkinson. He recalls that it took place on 9th
October rather than on the 11th
, and he is adamant that the purpose of the visit was connected with the hiatus hernia. He recalls that Dr Wilkinson told them that there was no sign of any recurrence of the cancer and that the operation for hernia repair would go ahead the following month. He says that his wife was given some new tablets.
Mr Ogden remembers that, in the period leading up to her death, Mrs Ogden slept downstairs. He recalls that she was incontinent but he believed that this was caused by taking Gaviscon for her hiatus hernia. He said that she slept downstairs because the only lavatory was downstairs. Mr Ogden remembers that, right up until the time of her death, his wife was very active. She did the shopping and housework and used to walk the dog and go out with her friends.
The recollections of Mrs Alexander and Mrs Hunt differ from that of Mr Ogden. They both recall that Mrs Ogden was extremely ill for several weeks before her death. Mrs Alexander, who was Mrs Ogden's closest friend, was spending virtually the whole of each day with Mrs Ogden. Mrs Alexander was also a State Registered Nurse and Mrs Ogden asked Mrs Alexander to nurse her. Mrs Ogden knew that she was dying of cancer. She was in great pain but bore it with fortitude. For the last two weeks of Mrs Ogden's life, Mrs Alexander stayed at the house continuously. Mrs Ogden spent most of the time on a reclining chair, which she found comfortable, but she was, to all intents and purposes, immobile. She was incontinent towards the end. This picture is confirmed by Mrs Hunt, also an old friend and nursing colleague, who was in the habit of visiting Mrs Ogden every Sunday. She visited on Sunday, 13th
October and found Mrs Ogden to be so weak that she did not expect to see her alive again.
The Last Three Days
Mr Ogden recalls that, on Tuesday, 15th
October, which was his birthday, his wife was well enough to go shopping with him in Stockport to buy a jacket. He produced to the Inquiry a photograph, which he says was taken on that day, 15th
October 1985, in which it can be seen that Mrs Ogden was looking remarkably well. He said that he had written the date on which the photograph was taken on the back of the print.
On the following day, Mr Ogden says that his wife told him that she had not slept well and he telephoned for the doctor, between 9am and 10am. When the doctor had not arrived by lunchtime, he telephoned again. Still the doctor did not arrive and Mr Ogden telephoned again at about 3pm. The receptionist then told him that it was Dr Moysey's half day off and another doctor would attend. Mr Ogden was annoyed. He says that Shipman arrived some time after 7pm. Mr Ogden says that he knew and recognised him. He says that his wife was sitting up in bed. She gave Shipman her history. She then explained that she had been having problems with her digestion and that her tablets had been changed. Shipman said he would give her an injection to ease the pain. He did not say what the injection was and Mr Ogden did not ask. Mr and Mrs Ogden thanked Shipman for coming. They all chatted for a while, then Shipman left. Mrs Ogden seemed quite well. She had a cup of tea and then said she would 'catch up on some sleep'. This would have been about an hour to an hour and a half after the injection was given. Mr Ogden thought the injection had helped.
It appeared to Mr Ogden that his wife slept well that night. In the morning of Thursday, 17th
October, he was pleased, as he thought she was catching up on the sleep she had lost the night before. By 11am, she had still not woken up and, he said, one of Mrs Ogden's nursing friends arrived. This woman tried to rouse his wife but could not and asked Mr Ogden to call the doctor. Dr Moysey came soon afterwards but, after looking at Mrs Ogden, he went away and came back again in company with another man. He looked again at Mrs Ogden and tried to rouse her. He looked very worried. He said that he had to go to fetch some equipment. He used the telephone and then left. Mr Ogden was sitting with his wife. She did not regain consciousness. Some time later, at a moment when he was out of the room, his wife died. He sent for Dr Moysey who came and certified the death.
Dr Moysey is unable to recollect the events surrounding Mrs Ogden's death. However, he confirms that Wednesday was his usual half day and that Shipman would usually cover his calls in the afternoon. He also confirms from the duty doctor transfer diary that Shipman was on duty that evening until 11pm. It does seem, therefore, that if Mrs Ogden was visited in the afternoon or evening of 16th
October, the doctor was probably Shipman. Shipman's own visits book does not contain a reference to Mrs Ogden.
Mrs Alexander has given a wholly different account of the last few days of Mrs Ogden's life. She recalls that Mrs Ogden's condition deteriorated steadily. She was in pain and took oral pethidine for pain relief. She was not up and about doing housework. Nor was she able to go shopping. Mrs Alexander remembers a doctor visiting, although she cannot say who it was. It was not Dr Moysey. She has seen pictures of Shipman since then and does not think it was he. She thinks that this visit occurred on Tuesday, 15th
October. Whenever the doctor came, she would leave the room and Mr Ogden would be with his wife during the consultation.
Mrs Alexander has seen the photograph which Mr Ogden says was taken on 15th
October. She, too, has a print of that photograph and several prints of several other photographs, all taken in the Ogdens' home, which all appear to have been taken on the same occasion. Several people were present, including Mrs Alexander and Mrs Hunt. Mrs Alexander is adamant that these photographs were not taken on Wednesday, 15th
October but were taken on a Sunday in about May or June 1985, about five months before Mrs Ogden's death.
According to Mrs Alexander, on Wednesday, 16th
October, Mrs Ogden was noticeably worse and she was put into bed, rather than spending the day in her chair. She was incontinent. Mrs Alexander nursed her and turned her regularly. On the Thursday, she was even weaker and lapsed into a coma. At about 6pm, Mr Ogden telephoned several of his wife's friends to warn them that the death was imminent. Mrs Hunt arrived and helped Mrs Alexander with the nursing. At about 7.20pm, Mrs Alexander and Mrs Hunt were turning Mrs Ogden when she died quite suddenly. Mrs Hunt confirmed this aspect of Mrs Alexander's evidence.
The Aftermath
It would appear that the occurrence of the death during the turning process gave rise to some discussion among the doctors who had been involved in Mrs Ogden's care. On 22nd
October 1985, Dr Wilkinson wrote to inform Mr McLennan of the death. He said that it was a little difficult from the general practitioner's description to find out exactly what had happened, but the account was said to be suggestive of subluxation of a cervical vertebra, producing cord compression. Dr Grenville has said that, where the cervical vertebrae are diseased, a fracture can occur very easily. The weight of the head can be enough to cause a fracture during the turning process. The subluxation causes compression of the spinal cord and death can follow very quickly.
Dr Moysey completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Ogden had died at 8pm on 17th
October 1985 at 36 Grosvenor Crescent. He said that he had been her ordinary medical attendant for two and a half years and that he had attended her during her last illness for five days. That last illness was metastatic breast cancer. He said that he had last seen her alive 12 hours before she died. He said that he had carried out a routine examination of her body 30 minutes after her death. He said that her mode of death was coma, which had lasted for 12 hours. His views as to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations. He said that Mrs Ogden was nursed by her husband during her last illness and that her husband was present at the moment of death. These entries are exactly what would be expected.
Mr Ogden claims that, at some stage after the death, he spoke to Dr Wilkinson, who observed that Mrs Ogden should not have died when she did.
The Expert Evidence
I have already referred to Dr Grenville's explanation for the mechanism of the death. He also considered Mr Ogden's account and the possibility that an injection, given by Shipman on Wednesday, 16th
October, might have caused or hastened the death, which occurred about 24 hours later. He says he can think of no drug which could have that delayed effect. I observe that Dr Grenville and Professor Henry McQuay have explained that, if a lethal dose of strong opiate is given intramuscularly, death will occur within about an hour. If a heavy dose of opiate is given to a patient who is on the verge of death, it could contribute to a death occurring within about four hours of administration.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Ogden died as the result of her cancer and not as the result of any injection which Shipman might have given.
I cannot accept Mr Ogden's account of the last few days and weeks of his wife's life. It is all a very long time ago and it may be that Mr Ogden's memory of events has faded. His account does not accord with the contemporaneous records kept by the Christie Hospital, which must be more reliable than personal memory. In my view, Mrs Alexander's recollection is far more reliable and, insofar as there is conflict between her account and that of Mr Ogden, I accept hers as accurate. I am quite satisfied that Mrs Ogden was not well enough to go out on 15th
October. Nor was she capable of the other activities which Mr Ogden recalls. I do not accept that the photograph which Mr Ogden showed was taken in October 1985. I accept that it was taken during the late spring or early summer of that year.
As I have found that Mr Ogden's memory is unreliable, I would, in any event, be unable to accept his account of the events of 16th
October. It may be that Shipman did visit on that day, possibly in the late afternoon or early evening, while he was covering for Dr Moysey or performing his out of hours rota duty. It may well be that he gave Mrs Ogden an injection. If so, this was not because Mrs Ogden was suffering from discomfort from her hiatus hernia. At this time, she was suffering severe pain as the result of the spread of her cancer into her bones. It may well be that the oral medication which had hitherto controlled her pain was no longer adequate and it may be that Shipman gave her an injection of strong opiate to relieve her pain. If he did so, I am quite satisfied that that injection did not kill her or contribute to her death. If Shipman came in the early evening of 16th
October, the injection cannot have directly contributed to the death, as she lived for about a further 24 hours. In any event, her death appears to have been precipitated by the act of turning her over and does not seem to have resulted from respiratory depression, the mechanism by which an opiate can kill.
Mrs Ogden was a brave woman who bore her final illness with great fortitude. In so far as Shipman might have played any part in her terminal care, I am quite satisfied that he caused her no harm.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001