The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Margaret Ousey
Introduction
Miss Margaret Ousey died at her home, 22 Well Meadow, Hyde on Thursday, 3rd
October 1991 at the age of 33. She was unmarried and lived with her parents, Mr Arthur Ousey and Mrs Ada Ousey. Mrs Ousey has since died. Miss Ousey was a patient of Dr Rowlands, who was a practitioner at the Donneybrook Surgery. However, it was Shipman who certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia due to multiple sclerosis.
The police have not investigated this case and no inquest has been held into the death.
In June 2001, the Inquiry interviewed Mr Ousey, in connection with the death of Mr Harold Eddleston. During the course of that interview, Mr Ousey expressed concern about the circumstances of his daughter's death.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Ousey and also from District Nurse Gooding, who provided occasional nursing care for Miss Ousey at her home. The Inquiry has also received a letter from District Nurse Clegg, who provided the main nursing care for Miss Ousey at home. The Inquiry has had access to Miss Ousey's computerised medical records (although the Lloyd George medical records have not been found) and Shipman's visits book for 1991. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Ousey had suffered from multiple sclerosis since she was 18 years old. By the time of her death, she was severely disabled and was unable to do anything for herself. For some time, she had used a wheelchair but at the time of her death, she was confined to bed. Her family cared for her, with the assistance of District Nurse Clegg, who remembers that, as Miss Ousey's condition gradually deteriorated, she became very thin and emaciated.
Mr Ousey has said that his daughter was initially registered with Dr Rowlands and that when he left the practice, she became a patient of Dr Roberts. In fact Dr Roberts left Donneybrook Surgery in 1980 and Dr Rowlands was still in practice there at the time of Miss Ousey's death and it appears therefore that Mr Ousey is mistaken. According to the medical records Miss Ousey was registered as a patient of Dr Rowlands at the time of her death.
The Events of the Weeks Leading up to Death
The medical records show that by the middle of September 1991, Miss Ousey was having difficulty in swallowing and was prescribed liquid Fortisip, a high energy food. I infer that by this time she was unable to take nourishment in the usual way. On 18th
September 1991, she was diagnosed as suffering from a chest infection and was prescribed antibiotics. It seems that there was no improvement. District Nurse Clegg or another member of the district nursing team would visit every day. She would turn Miss Ousey in bed and change the dressings on her bedsores. According to Mr Ousey, his daughter did not look ill but she was 'very phlegmy' and was finding it hard to breathe. She would stay in her inflatable bed in the lounge for most of the time and only left her bed to use the commode.
Mr Ousey told the Inquiry that District Nurse Clegg visited Miss Ousey on 2nd
October 1991 at about 9.30am. The nurse said that Miss Ousey's condition was deteriorating and that she should be admitted to hospital. Mrs Ousey, however, was determined that her daughter should be looked after at home. Miss Ousey hated hospitals and would not eat anything whilst there. District Nurse Clegg remembers that shortly before she died, Miss Ousey's chest infection turned to bronchopneumonia.
Later that day, Shipman arrived at the house together with a district nurse who was not District Nurse Clegg and may well have been District Nurse Gooding. Though Shipman was not Miss Ousey's general practitioner, it is possible that District Nurse Clegg's description of Miss Ousey's decline and the absence of Dr Rowlands from the surgery prompted his attendance. Shipman did not say much. He had a book with him, which he seemed to be considering with the nurse before administering any medication. Shipman then administered an injection to Miss Ousey using a syringe filled with a 'red coloured liquid'. Mr Ousey cannot remember which part of the body Shipman injected. Before leaving, Shipman handed a phial containing a substance to the nurse. He told her to wait with Miss Ousey for 30 minutes and to give her the contents of the phial if the injection did not work. The nurse did not in fact give the contents of the phial to Miss Ousey. In due course, the nurse left.
District Nurse Gooding, who is thought to be the nurse who was present during Shipman's visit, remembers visiting Miss Ousey on only two or three occasions and does not recall attending at the same time as Shipman. However, she does remember that Miss Ousey was very ill.
Mr Ousey cannot recall whether his daughter fell asleep following the injection. He says that she might have fallen asleep at some time between the nurse leaving and when he went to bed at around 8.30-9pm. Miss Ousey was still alive. That night Mrs Ousey slept in the lounge with her daughter.
The Day of the Death
Mr Ousey rose the following morning, 3rd
October, at 5am, as was his habit. He went downstairs and spoke to his wife, who made no mention of Miss Ousey having any problems during the night. He went into the lounge, where his daughter was still sleeping. He realised that his daughter was 'panting', and remembers that her panting gradually became worse until she took her last breath at 7am.
Mr Ousey telephoned the Donneybrook Surgery and requested that a doctor attend. After examining Miss Ousey, Dr Rowlands said that the death was sudden and would have to be reported to the police. After Dr Rowlands had left, Mrs Ousey was very upset at the prospect of involving the police, and either Mr or Mrs Ousey telephoned the surgery to enquire whether it really was necessary to notify the police. Someone from the surgery returned the call and said there was no need to report the death to the police, as it was not a sudden death. It appears that someone must have discovered that Shipman had visited Miss Ousey the previous day and was therefore in a position to certify the cause of death. It is also possible that there had been discussion with District Nurse Clegg, who remembers that the death was not in any way sudden or unexpected.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) on 3rd
October 1991. He said that he had seen Miss Ousey the day before her death.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate on 4th
October. He recorded that the time of death was 8.30am on 3rd
October and indicated that he had attended Miss Ousey, who was a patient of his partner, for a period of 24 hours during her last illness. He had last seen her alive 12 hours before her death. He saw the body 36 hours after death, presumably at the premises of the funeral director. The mode of death was said to be a coma lasting six to eight hours. His views as to the cause and mode of death were said to be based on the observations of Miss Ousey's parents and the district nurse. Shipman also recorded that both Miss Ousey's father and mother were present at her death. All those entries appear to accord with the recollection of Mr Ousey and none gives rise to any cause for concern.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker has considered the cremation documentation available in this case and has classified the death as not suspicious.
Dr Grenville has considered the computerised medical records and has noted that Miss Ousey suffered a chest infection that was diagnosed as bronchopneumonia in the days before she died. She was given two courses of the antibiotic Tarivid, the second beginning on 30th
September 1991. The computer record shows that Miss Ousey was prescribed injections of 500mg Amoxil, another antibiotic, on 2nd
October 1991. Dr Grenville has consulted the data sheet for an amoxicillin injection, which states that when the injection is first made up it may exhibit a pale pink colour, followed by opalescence. This suggests that Mr Ousey probably saw Shipman give his daughter an injection of amoxicillin. This would be appropriate treatment and could not have caused or hastened Miss Ousey's death. Dr Grenville says that the evidence suggests that Miss Ousey died a natural death due to bronchopneumonia, secondary to multiple sclerosis.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Miss Ousey died a natural death.
There is compelling evidence that Miss Ousey was critically ill in the days leading up to her death and that her condition had not improved after two courses of antibiotics. The records indicate that the doctor who attended on 2nd
October, who was Shipman, gave an injection of amoxicillin. This would not have caused Miss Ousey's death and would have been appropriate treatment for her very serious infection.
Shipman's usual method of killing his patients was to give a lethal injection of the opiate, diamorphine. In Miss Ousey's case, there could have been no justification for giving any opiate, as Miss Ousey was not in pain. It is extremely unlikely that Shipman would have given an inappropriate drug in the presence of a district nurse. In any event, Miss Ousey lived for about 12 hours after the injection. As Dr Grenville has explained in his generic evidence, if a lethal dose of opiate is given, death will occur within an hour.
It is understandable that Mr Ousey should feel concern about the circumstances of his daughter's death, bearing in mind the publicity surrounding Shipman's activities. I hope that this investigation and decision will put his mind completely at rest.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001