The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The First Report
>
Alphabetical List of Cases
>
Frances Elaine Oswald
Introduction
In 1974, Mrs (now Professor) Frances Elaine Oswald was living in Todmorden with her husband, Peter. She was 25 years old and worked as an executive officer for the Department of Health and Social Security (DHSS) in Rochdale. She was registered as a patient with the group practice at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre, Todmorden. She left Todmorden in 1975 and emigrated to the United States of America, with her family, in 1984.
On reading press reports at the time of Shipman's criminal trial, Professor Oswald became concerned that Shipman had tried to kill her when he visited her at her home on 21st
August 1974. In December 1999, she contacted the Greater Manchester Police to tell them of her concerns. Subsequently, Professor Oswald sent various documents to the police in Manchester, which were forwarded to the West Yorkshire Police who undertook an investigation into Shipman's activities in Todmorden. They interviewed Professor Oswald's parents and made unsuccessful attempts to obtain her general practitioner and hospital records and other contemporaneous documents. Their investigation did not proceed further until it was reopened in April 2001, at which time Professor Oswald provided a signed police statement. The police also obtained a statement from Dr John Grenville. There has been no prosecution arising from the incident described by Professor Oswald.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Professor Oswald, Mr Peter William Oswald (her husband), Mrs Joyce Taylor (Professor Oswald's mother), Mrs Nellie Oswald (Professor Oswald's mother-in-law), Detective Inspector David Heap, Detective Constable Gary Schofield, Mrs Mollie Dunkley (the practice receptionist) and two former partners in the practice, Dr David Bunn and Dr John Grieve. Dr Grenville has provided a report for the Inquiry. Professor Oswald and her husband gave evidence at an oral hearing on 9th
November 2001. Dr Grenville gave oral evidence on 19th
November 2001. Mrs Primrose May Shipman, Shipman's wife, was questioned about Professor Oswald when she gave oral evidence on 16th
November 2001.
No general practitioner or hospital records have survived save for two sets of obstetric records dated 1976 and 1979/80. The practice documents for Shipman's period in Todmorden have not survived. A number of newspaper articles, published in 2000 and 2001, describing Professor Oswald's experiences in 1974 were available to the Inquiry.
Since the oral hearings the Inquiry has made further investigations. Professor Oswald's personnel records from the DHSS have been recovered. A pharmacological report has been obtained from Professor B K Park and Professor M Pirmohamed of the Department of Pharmacology at Liverpool University. An expert report from Ms Alison Reboul, a senior forensic scientist at the Forensic Science Service, was obtained in December 2001, dealing with the authenticity of a document produced by Professor Oswald.
The Day of the Incident
Since investigations into Shipman's activities began, Professor Oswald has told her story on a number of occasions and there are some differences in the details which have been given at various times. For the purpose of outlining the facts at this stage, I shall rely on the account given by Professor Oswald in her oral evidence to the Inquiry.
On 21st
August 1974, Mrs Oswald attended morning surgery at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre where, by chance, she was seen by Shipman, whom she had not previously met. She got on well with him. She had a slight pain in her left side and wanted to know what it was. She thought she might have appendicitis. She was hoping to go into work later that day.
Shipman suggested that she might have a kidney stone. He gave her a prescription for a painkiller, Diconal, and told her to collect her medication, go home to bed and take two tablets. I interpose to say that, on various occasions when she has given an account of these events, Professor Oswald has said that Shipman told her to take one Diconal tablet. He said he would come round to see her after morning surgery and take a blood sample to test for calcium and phosphate. He told her to leave the front door unlocked so that he could gain access. She did as he instructed and was lying in bed, feeling drowsy, when Shipman arrived at about noon.
Shipman went up to Mrs Oswald's bedroom. They talked for a few moments and he mentioned that his wife and young son were in the car outside. He then approached to take the blood sample. She says that he took a sample from her left arm and she then recalls him leaning over towards her right arm. She then lost consciousness. Her next memory is waking up on the floor of the bedroom with Shipman and two ambulance men trying to rouse her. She says that Mrs Shipman and a child were present in the room. When she came round she was helped into an ambulance and was taken to hospital. Shipman accompanied her. While at hospital she says that she was treated unsympathetically by the staff, who appeared to believe that she had taken an overdose of some drug. Her husband was dispatched to collect the bottle of Diconal tablets from home so that a check could be made on the number of tablets she had taken. Professor Oswald says that there is no question of her having taken an overdose in August 1974 or at any time in her life and that she had taken only the dose advised by Shipman.
She says that her loss of consciousness occurred at a time just after Shipman had purported to take a blood sample. She now believes that he did not take a blood sample, but instead injected her with an opiate, intending to kill her.
The Aftermath
Mrs Oswald was released from hospital a few days after this incident and Shipman came to visit her at home the following Monday. He attributed her collapse to an acute hypersensitivity to Diconal and told her that she had lost consciousness while he was taking blood and that he had saved her life by giving her 'the kiss of life'. He had summoned his wife and told her to call an ambulance. He explained that the symptoms of sweating, hot flushes and tremors, which Professor Oswald says she was then experiencing, were those of drug withdrawal. He expressed surprise at the violence of her reaction to the drug and showed an interest in writing up her case in the medical journals. The Inquiry's investigations reveal that he did not do so and probably did not even complete a 'yellow card' to report an adverse reaction to the drug manufacturer as he should have done. The manufacturer can find no record of a report from Shipman. If a yellow card is submitted a report should be sent to the Committee on Safety of Medicines. That body can find no report in Shipman's name. It is perhaps surprising, in view of the interest which Shipman exhibited in Mrs Oswald's collapse and its cause, that he does not appear to have taken any steps to initiate any investigation into the incident.
On this same occasion, Shipman also warned Mrs Oswald that she should never take narcotic drugs, even in childbirth. He invited her and her husband to dinner at his home two days later and she says that they had a pleasant evening. She says that, on that evening, he provided her with a form to obtain a Medic-Alert bracelet to wear at all times as a warning to medical practitioners who might treat her in the future. He had already signed the form. That form, together with later documentation, was obtained by the Inquiry. It was date-stamped, presumably by Medic-Alert, on 25th
September 1974. The first bracelet appears to have been issued on 27th
September 1974 and Mrs Oswald's details were updated in 1979 and 1981. She says that she wore the bracelet for 15 years after this incident and, although she then stopped, she has believed ever since that she is hypersensitive to narcotics. She has avoided them on all occasions, even in childbirth. The hospital obstetric records relating to the birth of Professor Oswald's two children are available and confirm that she told the hospitals that she was 'allergic to pethidine' or had a 'narcotic allergy'.
Professor Oswald says that, from 1974 until Shipman's trial, she believed that she owed her life to Shipman who, as a result of his fortuitous presence at the time of her collapse, had been able to resuscitate her.
Media Involvement
On reading press reports of Shipman's trial, Professor Oswald became concerned that, far from having saved her life, Shipman had in fact tried to kill her. As I have said, in December 1999 she contacted the Greater Manchester Police to tell them of her concerns and the incident was subsequently investigated by the West Yorkshire Police.
On 13th
February 2000, within a fortnight of Shipman's convictions, Professor Oswald's story, 'Was I the young Doctor Shipman's first victim?', appeared in the
Sunday Times
. Although Professor Oswald suggested in oral evidence that she had been approached by the press to tell her story, it is now clear that the first approach to the
Sunday Times
newspaper was made by Professor Oswald herself in an email from the United States dated 7th
February 2000. The newspaper article was based on a statement that had been faxed to the police on 11th
February. According to a letter written by the solicitor for Times Newspapers Limited, the article was seen by Professor Oswald before publication and, afterwards, Professor Oswald contacted the newspaper to say how pleased she was with it. The article was accompanied by a news report, which is said to have been discussed with Professor Oswald before publication.
In June 2000, Professor Oswald contacted Alexander Harris, solicitors representing some of the relatives of known and suspected victims of Shipman, with a view to making a claim for compensation. She indicated that she realised that the value of her claim would be small but she wished to become involved with the legal process in England, as she felt strongly that Shipman had had a great impact upon her life. At the conclusion of this telephone conversation, Professor Oswald promised to send to Alexander Harris a copy of the statement already provided to the police. A representative from the firm was to contact her within two days, with a view to arranging a meeting with her on her next visit to England. In the event, it appears that no further contact was made by either side.
Much of the information contained in the
Sunday Times
article, with some additional features, was subsequently repeated in articles in
The Times
and the
Yorkshire Post
in January 2001, shortly after the publication of Professor Richard Baker's report.
In addition, Professor Oswald has told her story on television on at least three different occasions. The video films of two of the programmes concerned have been available to the Inquiry and I have seen them.
Professor Oswald's Oral Evidence
Professor Oswald's oral evidence was in some respects unsatisfactory. The way in which she gave her evidence lacked spontaneity, probably because she had given her account on so many previous occasions. Her presentation was somewhat dramatic. It is possible that this is a reflection of her professional style of public speaking. In any event, I found it difficult to assess the accuracy and truthfulness of her account.
A second difficulty arose from the fact that Professor Oswald's accounts have varied in some respects from time to time. For example, she has sometimes said that Shipman told her to take two tablets and sometimes one. She has sometimes said that Shipman took a blood sample from her left arm and sometimes from the right. Sometimes she has not mentioned the taking of a blood sample at all. On one occasion, she said that the first recollection she had, after seeing Shipman in her bedroom, was waking up in hospital. Whilst these variations only affected details within her account, rather than its main thrust, they gave rise to some concern about her accuracy.
More worryingly, Professor Oswald admitted while giving oral evidence that the story as told in the various newspaper articles contained 'some story-telling fictional details'. One example of these was her explanation that, when editing a newspaper article, she had changed her description of Shipman's movements while in her bedroom so that it sounded better 'from a story-telling point of view'. This was probably no more than a bit of harmless embroidery. A second example gives rise to greater concern. Professor Oswald had expressed the opinion that Shipman intended to kill her on 21st
August 1974. She believed she was his 'first victim'. There was an obvious inconsistency between that contention and an essential part of her story, which was that Shipman had resuscitated her. In the article which appeared in
The Times
of 9th
January 2001, Professor Oswald asserted that Shipman had tried to kill her and had resuscitated her only because his wife had come into the house unexpectedly, bringing their child in to use the lavatory. The implication was that Shipman's design had thereby been frustrated. In her oral evidence, she conceded that her claim that Mrs Shipman had brought the child in to use the lavatory was surmise. It had been presented to the public as fact. My concern was that, as Professor Oswald seemed willing to add fictional details to make her article more interesting and convincing to readers, she might also have been prepared to dramatise, exaggerate or invent matters of greater substance, which would render her article more sensational and saleable.
I was also concerned about Professor Oswald's account of her relationship with Times Newspapers Limited. In oral evidence, she asserted that she had been approached to write her article for the
Sunday Times
. The solicitor for Times Newspapers Limited asserts that Professor Oswald approached the newspaper. I have seen a copy of the email by which she offered to write the article. I am afraid I am driven to the conclusion that Professor Oswald did not tell the truth when claiming that the newspaper had approached her. She asserted on oath that she was paid only £200 by Times Newspapers. The company solicitor asserts that she was paid the usual fee for this type of work, which was £500. I accept that she might have made a mistake about the amount of money she had received, but I do not think she could have forgotten that she had approached Times Newspapers Limited with a view to selling her story.
Professor Oswald also sought and appeared to enjoy media attention while in Manchester for the purpose of giving evidence to the Inquiry. She was, of course, entitled to hold a press conference and to give as many interviews as she chose. However, her conduct gave rise to a concern that her primary interest might be publicity rather than the provision of a straightforward account of events.
The knowledge that Professor Oswald had mixed fact, fiction and speculation in her newspaper accounts inevitably raised the possibility that the same mixture might exist in her oral evidence. The fact that she had sought further publicity at the time of giving her evidence to the Inquiry gave rise to a concern that she might have a motive to maintain the supposed truth of those parts of her story which had not in fact been true.
At the time of the oral hearing, the Medic-Alert documentation, the obstetric records and two pieces of paper identified as a 'journal entry' were the only contemporaneous documents available to assist in determining the truth and accuracy of Professor Oswald's account. In particular, her general practitioner and hospital records have been destroyed. It was because of my concerns about the reliability of Professor Oswald's oral evidence that I instructed the Inquiry team to make further investigations after the oral hearing. I wanted to know to what extent independent corroboration could be found for her account. I am pleased to say that those further enquiries have demonstrated that Professor Oswald's account of events is substantially true.
The Journal Entry
I was particularly concerned about the provenance of Professor Oswald's 'journal entry', which contained an account broadly consistent with her oral evidence. She said that she had written this entry very shortly after the events described. However, the journal entry comprised two loose pages of manuscript. In the
Sunday Times
article, Professor Oswald had given the impression that the entry formed part of a daily diary. When the Inquiry requested the original journal, Professor Oswald indicated that the original 'journal' had consisted of loose pages, all of which had been destroyed with the exception of the two relevant pages, which she had kept in her 'medical file'. The possibility that the journal pages had come into existence since December 1999 could not be excluded.
A report was commissioned from the Forensic Science Service to determine whether the journal entry was likely to have come into existence over 25 years ago as claimed or whether it was of recent origin. On examining the paper, Ms Alison Reboul, senior forensic scientist, found that it lacked crispness, had a yellowish colour and showed signs of wear, and that the writing had the appearance of having been produced before the creases in the paper were made. She concluded that her findings were more consistent with the document having originated about 25 years ago than recently. She could therefore accept that it was a genuine document originating from approximately 1974/75.
In the light of that report, I am able to accept the journal entry as an almost contemporaneous record of events. The important factor is that it was written at a time when Mrs Oswald had no motive to embellish her account. That account refers to an instruction from Shipman for her to take two Diconal tablets and mentions that Shipman's visit to her home was for the purpose of taking blood tests for calcium and phosphate. It also describes Shipman taking blood from her left arm and then moving round to her right arm. It is at that point, she said, that she lost consciousness. She related how she came round to find Mrs Shipman and a child in the bedroom as well as two ambulance men. She went on to detail the events which followed, including the symptoms which she said she suffered for a week after the incident. I accept that record as true.
Personnel Records
Professor Oswald's personnel records from her employment with the DHSS have been found. These contain several relevant documents. There is a record of sick leave showing that she was absent from work from 16th
August until 24th
September 1974. The recorded reason was
'Abdominal Pain'
. There is a medical certificate signed by Shipman and dated 15th
August 1974, indicating that she was incapable of work due to a torn rectus muscle and would remain incapable for seven days. This certificate strongly suggests that Professor Oswald was mistaken in her assertion that she had first met Shipman on 21st
August. There is a hospital in-patient certificate, signed by an official at the Victoria Hospital, Burnley and dated 21st
August 1974, stating that Mrs Oswald had received treatment as an in-patient since that day and was expected to remain an in-patient for at least a further week. There is a medical certificate dated 21st
August 1974, signed by Shipman, giving a diagnosis of
'ureteric stone'
and stating that Mrs Oswald would remain incapable of work for two weeks. There is a further medical certificate, signed by Shipman and dated 3rd
September 1974, stating that Mrs Oswald was incapable of work by reason of a chest infection and would remain so for seven days. Another medical certificate, signed by Shipman and dated 9th
September 1974, covered a further two weeks' absence with a diagnosis of abdominal pain. A final medical certificate, signed by Shipman and dated 19th
September 1974, stated that Mrs Oswald was incapable of work by reason of
'Hospital Investigation'
and would be fit to resume work on
'Wednesday next'
. The part of the certificate completed by Mrs Oswald herself makes clear that the Wednesday in question was 25th
September 1974.
The most important document in the personnel records is a confidential memorandum dated 19th
September 1974, written by the staff welfare officer and giving the following account of the events of the previous few weeks:
'Mrs Oswald has been off sick since 16.8.74. I called to see her at home on 18.9.74. She explained how the incapacity began. She was having an abdominal pain and her doctor had first thought it was a torn muscle ordering her to rest. After a week she found the pain was increasing and visited her doctor again. After further examination he decided that she had a kidney stone, prescribed diconol
(
sic
)
to reduce the pain, told her to go home, rest in bed and he would come to see her. Mrs Oswald obtained the diconol
(
sic
)
and took the first dose. This produced alarming symptoms which after a short period stopped Mrs Oswald from breathing. It was fortunate that the doctor was near at hand and he had to give the kiss of life to restore her to consciousness. She was hurried into Burnley Victoria Hospital for intensive care and until the effects of the drug wore off. It transpires that she is allergic to this particular group of drugs. While in hospital she caught a chest infection and is, following her discharge being treated with antibiotics. The kidney stone now appears to have dissolved and the pain is much reduced although there is still some soreness. In general Mrs Oswald is feeling stronger and although she is to visit the hospital again at the beginning of October for a check up she is hoping to be able to resume work before then...'
.
These records show that Mrs Oswald had had a history of pain before 21st
August and had already been off work for some days. They confirm to a very large extent her account of the events of the day, including the visit to Shipman, his diagnosis, the prescription of Diconal, the presence of Shipman at her home and her belief that her breathing stopped, that Shipman resuscitated her and that the incident occurred because of a hypersensitivity to Diconal.
The Effect of Diconal
Diconal is the trade name for a tablet which contains a strong opiate, dipipanone, and the anti-emetic, cyclizine. It is indicated for acute pain. Diconal, like all opiates, can cause acute respiratory depression, and sensitivity to it varies from person to person. According to Dr Grenville, two tablets of Diconal, which would amount to 20mg, taken orally, would not be expected to cause acute respiratory distress. If there were an especial hypersensitivity to opiates, Dr Grenville would expect Mrs Oswald to have experienced nausea and vomiting, despite the cyclizine, and also dizziness and drowsiness coming on slowly and alerting her to the fact that there was a problem.
The Inquiry commissioned a report from the Department of Pharmacology at Liverpool University as to the plausibility of Mrs Oswald having suffered a severe adverse or acute allergic reaction to one or two tablets of Diconal.
In their report Professors Park and Pirmohamed explain that Diconal, like other opioid analgesics, can cause respiratory depression as a result of its effect on the opioid receptors in a specialised part of the brain responsible for controlling breathing. In addition, it can cause an anaphylactoid reaction resulting from the release of chemicals from specialised cells which affect the blood vessels, causing them to dilate and exude fluid. An anaphylactoid reaction is unpredictable and in a severe form can cause arrhythmias and cardiac arrest.
Having reviewed the available literature the professors concluded that it is unlikely, although not impossible, that a dose of 20mg Diconal would produce such a severe respiratory depression in a healthy individual. An anaphylactoid reaction is also a possibility which cannot be excluded, although the signs and symptoms described are not typical. There is little relationship between the size of dose and its effects in an anaphylactoid reaction and thus a 20mg dose could cause such a reaction. The professors make the point that the unpredictabilty of an anaphylactoid reaction means that it would not necessarily be possible to repeat the effect produced by the drug on a second occasion.
The Evidence of Mrs Shipman
The 'journal entry' made in 1974/75 mentions the presence of Mrs Shipman and a child in Mrs Oswald's bedroom after she regained consciousness and a subsequent dinner party at the Shipmans' home at which the incident was discussed. When Mrs Shipman gave evidence she said that she had no recollection at all of the events in which she was said to have played a part. Attempts were made to jog her memory by showing her a video depicting photographs of Mrs Oswald as she was in the early 1970s and of Mrs Oswald's house, but to no avail. Mrs Shipman said that she could not remember Mrs Oswald or her collapse and resuscitation or the dinner party which followed.
Given the fact that this was a dramatic incident, in which her husband appeared to have played an heroic part, it is surprising that Mrs Shipman cannot remember it. However, I am satisfied that she has made a genuine attempt to remember. I found her an honest and straightforward witness. Before she came to give evidence she was asked whether she had any documents in her possession relevant to the Inquiry's investigations. She admitted that she had and delivered them up. They have been of great assistance to the Inquiry and have helped me to reach decisions on a number of individual deaths where, without them, I might have been unable to do so. Although Mrs Shipman might not have realised the potential importance of these documents and the extent to which they might damage her husband's interests, I consider that a dishonest woman, whose only concern was to protect her husband come what may, would have disposed of the documents and said that they had been destroyed long ago. In oral evidence, Mrs Shipman was asked about two individual cases, besides the incident involving Mrs Oswald. I believe she told the truth in respect of both of those cases. In the case of Mrs Irene Chapman, Mrs Shipman's evidence was very damaging to her husband's interest. Surprising though it is that she cannot remember the incident involving Mrs Oswald, I believe that Mrs Shipman was telling the truth and I conclude that she has forgotten it. These events occurred more than 25 years ago.
Professor Oswald's Response to Counsel's Submission
As in all the other cases before the Inquiry, Counsel to the Inquiry prepared a submission containing a summary of the evidence in this case and an analysis of the issues. Such documents often contain a submission as to the reliability of the evidence of the witnesses. In this case, Miss Swift QC drew my attention to potential weaknesses in Professor Oswald's evidence. The submission was sent to Professor Oswald, who has expressed her strong objection.
Professor Oswald's letter of complaint has been published on the Inquiry's website. In essence, she complains that Miss Swift's submission is defamatory of her and is the product of personal prejudice. She resents the way in which her honesty has been doubted and the suggestion that she has courted publicity. She requests that there should be a 'full and generous' apology and a statement which makes it plain that her version of the events of 1974 is correct. She complains that she has been made to feel that she has been 'on trial' when she is, in truth, a victim. She feels that the Inquiry has not empathised with her turmoil.
Professor Oswald also complains that her relations with the media have been misrepresented in Miss Swift's submission. She asserts that she has only co-operated with the press from a desire to shed light on Shipman's crimes. She wanted to ensure that there would be an investigation into Shipman's crimes going back to 1974. She says that she has not found it easy to talk to the press as she is a 'very private person'. She says too that she did not court publicity while attending the Inquiry. She says that the Inquiry press officer suggested that she should give a press conference and that she agreed to do so. She says that she feels that she is 'on trial' for speaking to the press and cannot see why the Inquiry thinks this is 'so heinous'. She asserts that she is 'not guilty of wrongdoing'.
Insofar as Professor Oswald's complaint relates to the fact that her evidence was doubted, I hope that it is plain from this decision that doubts existed in my mind as well as Miss Swift's. It was at my personal request that the Inquiry team undertook further investigations after the hearing at which Professor Oswald gave oral evidence. I am pleased that the further investigations, in particular the discovery of the DHSS personnel records, showed that Professor Oswald's evidence was substantially true. I make no apology for Miss Swift's submission; it was her duty to make it.
Mr Henry Palin, solicitor to the Inquiry, has responded to Professor Oswald's allegation that the suggestion that she should give a press conference was made by the Inquiry's press officer. He has reminded Professor Oswald that the suggestion that she should give a press conference was made by her in an email sent to the Inquiry on 7th
November 2001. This had been preceded by an email from Miss Ita Langan, Mr Palin's deputy, advising Professor Oswald not to speak to the press until after she had given her evidence and then only if she wished to do so. Miss Langan assured her that once she arrived in the UK the Inquiry would do its best to shield her from media intrusion. Mr Palin has also reminded Professor Oswald that, by the time she was collected from her hotel by Miss Kerry Elliott, of the Inquiry's Communications Office, on the morning of the hearing, she was already accompanied by a reporter representing the
Sunday Mirror
.
I have seen the email communications referred to by Mr Palin. I am satisfied that the suggestion that there should be a press conference came initially from Professor Oswald. It also appears that Professor Oswald may not have heeded the advice given to her by Miss Langan that she should not speak to the press before giving her evidence.
Professor Oswald is not guilty of 'wrongdoing' in speaking to the press. I fully recognise her right to speak to the media and I can well understand why she wished to do so in early 2000, when it might not otherwise have been realised that Shipman's unlawful activities had begun as early as 1974. I do not criticise her for speaking to the press at that time. My concern arose because her articles contained 'some story-telling fictional details' and some important suppositions and I feared that these would be reproduced in her evidence. I do regard it as regrettable that Professor Oswald was with a press reporter when she arrived at the Inquiry hearing. She had been advised not to speak to the press until after she had given her evidence. It is well recognised by judges in this country and elsewhere that the reliability of a witness's evidence is likely to be affected if it has previously been recounted in response to questions from a media interviewer, whose function and aims are different from those of a court or inquiry.
Conclusions
It seems clear from the contemporaneous documents that an incident did indeed occur on 21st
August 1974, when Mrs Oswald collapsed in Shipman's presence and required resuscitation and hospitalisation. It seems highly likely that the collapse was due to the administration of a drug. It is theoretically possible that it occurred as a result of an overdose of opiates taken recreationally or in an attempt to do harm to herself and that she concealed this in her 'journal entry' and in the account given to her employers. There is no evidence that this was the case and Professor Oswald has denied it. I accept her evidence that she had taken only the Diconal and only as Shipman had instructed. I also accept that the essentials of the account set out in her journal entry are true.
The first issue for me to decide is whether this was a reaction to a painkiller innocently prescribed or the result of the deliberate injection of an opiate by Shipman or a reaction to both drugs combined. If I conclude that Shipman did inject a drug into Mrs Oswald's arm under the guise of taking a blood sample, I must also consider what his intention was in so doing.
What caused Mrs Oswald to collapse? It appears from the pharmacological evidence that it is possible, although unlikely, that Mrs Oswald's collapse was caused by an anaphylactoid reaction or respiratory depression resulting from 20mg Diconal. However, it would have been a remarkable coincidence for such a collapse to occur so soon after Shipman arrived at Mrs Oswald's house. That the collapse occurred in his presence gives rise to suspicion that he caused it. There are other factors which increase my suspicion.
First, there seems no good reason for Shipman to have been at Mrs Oswald's house at all. According to Dr Grenville, blood tests of the type proposed would not assist in diagnosis of a kidney stone. The appropriate diagnostic test was to take a urine sample and examine it for microscopic haematuria. Even if Shipman had thought that a blood test was necessary, there was no apparent reason why this should not have been done at the surgery earlier in the morning. It seems that Shipman was seeking an excuse to visit Mrs Oswald, which is in itself suspicious.
Second, the journal entry describes how the collapse occurred just after Shipman had been using a needle, as Mrs Oswald believed, to take blood from her left arm. In later years Shipman often injected his patients with opiates under the pretext of taking a blood sample. In the light of that, it would seem unlikely that, at the very moment when Shipman 'took a blood sample', Mrs Oswald would collapse from some other unrelated cause. She probably collapsed because the 'taking of the blood sample' was, in truth, an injection in disguise.
It seems likely that Mrs Oswald's collapse followed the giving of an injection of opiate by Shipman. That she had already taken two Diconal tablets must inevitably have increased the risk that she might suffer respiratory arrest and collapse if a further dose of opiate were injected. I think it likely that the collapse was caused by the combination of the Diconal and the additional injected drug.
In my view, the injected drug was probably pethidine. The Inquiry has evidence that Shipman began to acquire pethidine unlawfully from April 1974, only one month after his arrival in Todmorden in March 1974 as a young doctor starting his first job in general practice. It appears highly likely that he was taking pethidine himself at this time. There is no clear evidence that Shipman was obtaining morphine or diamorphine illicitly in 1974, although the possibility must exist.
The question of Shipman's intention then arises. In the light of what is now known of Shipman's later activities, the possibility that he intended to kill Mrs Oswald must be a real one. However, there are several factors which have led me to the conclusion that he almost certainly did not intend to kill her or even to cause her serious harm.
The first is that at this time Shipman was not an established killer and did not become one for some time. If Shipman did try to kill Mrs Oswald, it was his first venture.
Examination of my decisions will show that there was not one among his victims who was young and in good health. In my view, it is clear that if Shipman did try to kill Mrs Oswald, it would have been atypical behaviour, not only at that time but for the rest of his medical career.
Second, an attempt by Shipman to kill Mrs Oswald would have involved a massive risk of discovery. She was a healthy young woman and her death or serious injury would have attracted considerable local attention. It would have inevitably been followed by a post-mortem examination, almost certainly with toxicological tests. The fact that Shipman had seen Mrs Oswald in his surgery that morning and had visited her at home would have become known and his activities would have been subjected to scrutiny. His own use of pethidine and his illegal obtaining of the drug would probably have emerged, together with the fact that he had killed or seriously injured Mrs Oswald. As it was, he faced some risk of investigation. It seems to me that Shipman's attempts to make Mrs Oswald think he had saved her life were designed to prevent her from wondering whether he had done anything to her that he should not have done. I think he was probably terrified that she would make some sort of complaint and the truth would come out.
Third, it is clear that Shipman resuscitated Mrs Oswald. Why he would have done that if he intended to kill her is hard to imagine unless one embarks on the kind of speculation in which Professor Oswald indulged when she suggested that Mrs Shipman had entered the house unexpectedly. A much more obvious reason why he resuscitated her is that he was horrified at her collapse and hastened to do all he could to bring her round.
I think Shipman gave Mrs Oswald an excessive dose of pethidine by mistake and was shocked by its effect. In assessing the dose, he might have failed to take account of the two Diconal tablets she had already taken orally. He might have based his calculation of the pethidine dose on his own usage, forgetting that while he was accustomed to pethidine, Mrs Oswald was opiate-naïve.
If Shipman did not intend to kill Mrs Oswald, what were his intentions? I am sure they were not honourable ones. His conduct afterwards in seeking to placate Mrs Oswald by paying her much attention and being unusually hospitable is compatible with a desire to gloss over the incident. His failure to report the adverse reaction to the drug manufacturer would suggest that he did not want the incident to be investigated. Counsel has suggested that Shipman intended merely to experiment in some way by involving Mrs Oswald in his habit of abusing pethidine. That is possible. Another possibility is that he hoped that, while she was under the influence of the drug, she might agree to indulge in some sexual activity, although to embark on such conduct while his wife was outside in the car seems foolhardy.
My conclusion is that Shipman probably did inject Mrs Oswald with an opiate and caused her to suffer respiratory arrest. I do not feel able to reach any positive conclusion as to his motive. However, I think it is highly unlikely that he had any intention to kill her or to cause her serious harm.
I hope and intend that this decision leaves no one in doubt as to the truth of Professor Oswald's account to the Inquiry of what Shipman did on 21st
August 1974. I have accepted it as true.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001