The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Phyllis Oxley
Introduction
Mrs Phyllis Oxley died at her home, 25 Chestnut Avenue, Todmorden on Monday, 26th
May 1975 at the age of 59. She was a patient at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre. She and her husband had moved to Todmorden in about 1973. At the time of Mrs Oxley's death, Shipman had been practising in Todmorden for about 14 months. He certified that the cause of her death was poorly differentiated endometrial carcinoma.
Mrs Oxley's death was one of the 22 deaths for which the cause was certified by Shipman during his time in Todmorden. Following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's report in January 2001, the West Yorkshire Police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Nigel Oxley (Mrs Oxley's husband), Miss Anne Eastwood (Mrs Oxley's daughter) and Mrs Myra Bairstow (one of the district nurses who worked at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre).
An inquest into Mrs Oxley's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Oxley, Miss Eastwood and Mrs Bairstow, as well as from Mr George Ferguson McKeating, formerly a police officer in the Wakefield Drug Squad, and from Dr David Bunn and Dr John Michael Grieve, partners of Shipman at the medical centre. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville. Miss Eastwood gave oral evidence at a hearing on Monday, 5th
November 2001. Mrs Oxley's medical records have not survived.
Personal Background
A few months before she died, Mrs Oxley was diagnosed as having inoperable pelvic cancer, probably in the endometrium, the uterine lining. As her health declined, she was nursed by Miss Eastwood and Mr Oxley. She was in considerable pain and Miss Eastwood recalls that Shipman called quite regularly to give injections for pain relief. In the last three days before the death, Mrs Oxley's condition deteriorated rapidly. Mr Oxley and Miss Eastwood remained with her. They were reconciled to her imminent death.
The Events Leading up to the Death
Mr Oxley recalls that Shipman saw his wife either on the day before she died or on the day before that. He remembers no later visit. He believes that it was only after Mrs Oxley's death that Miss Eastwood telephoned Shipman again.
Miss Eastwood remembers that on Sunday, 25th
May 1975, the day before the death, she spent the day with her mother. Her mother was in terrible pain and was breathing heavily but remained remarkably cheerful. Shipman came more than once on that day. In the morning, he gave Mrs Oxley an injection, which Miss Eastwood thought was morphine, although she did not really know. Shipman might have visited again in the afternoon; Miss Eastwood is not sure. However, she does recall that he visited again in the evening. During the day, Mrs Oxley became more drowsy and short of breath. District Nurse Bairstow, who was a friend of Miss Eastwood, visited during the day but it is not clear at what time she left.
Shipman gave Miss Eastwood a prescription for further supplies of pain relieving drugs for her mother. The pharmacy did not open until 6pm. Miss Eastwood went to collect the drugs at about 7pm. She remembers that she had to sign a special book, which I am sure was the controlled drugs register. At some time in the evening, Shipman visited her mother and gave another injection. Miss Eastwood cannot remember at what time this last visit occurred and thinks it might have been as late as 10pm. Shipman was never alone with her mother. Shipman then left.
At about 1am, Mrs Oxley died. Shipman was called out to confirm the death. He came quite quickly. Miss Eastwood remembers that there was some unused morphine; how much, she cannot say. Shipman asked her to give it to him. He explained that this was a controlled drug and that he was obliged by law to return it. This seemed sensible to Miss Eastwood and she gave it to him. There was no discussion about a post-mortem examination.
Certification
The cremation certificate was recovered by the Inquiry by searching the records held at Padiham Town Hall. Mr Oxley made the application for cremation and Shipman completed cremation Form B. Shipman's entries are consistent with Miss Eastwood's recollections. He said that Mrs Oxley had died at home at 1.55am on 26th
May 1975. He said that he had been her ordinary medical attendant for 14 months, having attended her during the ten month duration of her final illness. He last saw her alive on 25th
May 1975 and saw her body within 30 minutes after her death. The mode of her death was coma lasting six hours. His responses concerning the cause and mode of death were the result of his own observations, together with those of Mr Oxley and Miss Eastwood. He said that Mr Oxley, Miss Eastwood and District Nurse Bairstow had nursed Mrs Oxley during her final illness. Mr Oxley and Miss Eastwood had been present at the death.
The Expert Evidence
According to Dr Grenville, the circumstances do not suggest that Mrs Oxley was given a lethal dose of opiate by injection. They suggest that Mrs Oxley was given appropriate pain relief in the context of a painful terminal illness.
Mr Oxley's Concerns
Mr Oxley was concerned that Shipman had failed to diagnose his wife's illness as early as he should have. He was extremely distressed and had to be restrained when he attended at the surgery to remonstrate with Shipman about this perceived delay. This matter cannot be investigated by the Inquiry for two reasons. First, it falls outside the Inquiry's Terms of Reference. Second, the medical records are no longer available.
Mr Oxley was also dissatisfied with Shipman's lack of attention to Mrs Oxley. He describes one occasion when, on returning home from work, he discovered Shipman had not visited to administer morphine, as arranged. He was angry and called the surgery. He spoke to someone who he believes was Shipman's wife. Mrs Shipman apparently explained that Shipman had fallen out of bed and injured himself. Mr Oxley was dismissive of that remark and demanded attention for his wife. It would appear that both Dr Grieve and Dr Bunn attended very quickly and administered the necessary morphine.
It appears that Mr Oxley did not believe Mrs Shipman. However, we know from Dr John Dacre's diary that Shipman had fallen and suffered concussion on Thursday, 15th
May. There is also a letter dated 20th
May 1975 from Burnley Victoria Hospital, extracted from Shipman's medical notes, which records an emergency overnight admission following a fall and loss of consciousness. Thus, the remark as understood was broadly correct and would suggest that the incident about which Mr Oxley is concerned took place a few days before Mrs Oxley died.
Mr Oxley says that he was also concerned about the quantities of morphine that Shipman gave to his wife. According to Mr Oxley, he would collect his wife's prescription from the pharmacy. He was rarely present when Shipman administered the injections but, when he was, he suspected that Shipman was hiding something from him because he always kept his back to him as he filled the syringe. Moreover, according to Mr Oxley, the relief obtained by his wife from Shipman's injections seemed to be short-lived, especially when compared with the relief she obtained when a doctor from another practice once gave the injection. On that occasion, the relief lasted longer. Mr Oxley's concern was increased when he discovered some incongruity in the size of a capsule discarded by Shipman and the size of the grey cases containing the capsules which he himself would collect for his wife and which he presumed to contain morphine. It is not possible to investigate these allegations. However, the possibility that Shipman was stealing morphine for his own purposes cannot be discounted. He was certainly stealing pethidine at this time, sometimes by keeping for himself part of the supply of drugs that had been prescribed for patients with a genuine need. Miss Eastwood's recollection that Shipman asked for the remaining morphine ampoules to be handed to him gives rise to a suspicion that he might have kept Mrs Oxley's remaining morphine for his own purposes.
Conclusion
Notwithstanding Mr Oxley's understandable concerns about some aspects of Shipman's behaviour, it is unlikely that Shipman caused Mrs Oxley's death. Mrs Oxley was clearly in the terminal phase of cancer and was, quite properly, given opiate drugs for pain relief. In those days, such drugs were usually injected by a doctor, possibly several times a day. Nowadays, patients would be provided with a syringe driver, which would give them a continuous supply of analgesic drug. On the last day of Mrs Oxley's life, Shipman gave her at least two and probably three injections of opiate. The last injection seems to have been given before 10pm. Mrs Oxley lived for about three hours after that injection. As Dr Grenville has explained in his generic evidence, if a lethal dose of opiate is given intravenously, the patient will die within a few minutes. If the dose is given intramuscularly, the patient will die within about an hour. That Mrs Oxley lived for three hours after her final injection shows that she did not die as a direct result of a lethal injection.
Dr Grenville also explained that a smaller excessive dose given to a debilitated patient could have the effect of depressing respiration, with the result that the patient might die some hours later, possibly from bronchopneumonia. The opiate would then be a contributory cause of death although not the immediate cause. Because he was later proved to be a serial killer, I cannot rule out the possibility that Shipman deliberately gave Mrs Oxley such a dose of morphine, which contributed to her death in this way. I regard this, however, as unlikely, in all the circumstances.
Dr Grenville has told the Inquiry that it can be difficult for a doctor to assess the correct amount of opiate to give for pain relief when the patient has been taking opiates for some time but the pain is breaking through. The doctor will wish to give enough to relieve the pain but the dose can have the effect of shortening the patient's life, although probably only to a small extent. Provided the dose is assessed in good faith as being for the patient's benefit, the administration would be lawful. It is possible that Shipman did shorten Mrs Oxley's life by a small margin by giving a dose of opiate, which was assessed in good faith.
My conclusion is that Mrs Oxley probably died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001