The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Samuel Oldham
Introduction
Mr Samuel Oldham died at his home, 65 Mottram Old Road, Hyde on Monday, 2nd
March 1981 at the age of 69. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Oldham's death was carcinoma of the large bowel.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed advertisements in a number of newspapers, publishing a list of cases in which the Inquiry had only limited information as to the circumstances of the death and in which no relatives had been traced. In response, Mr Lynn Oldham and Mrs Carole Shore, Mr Oldham's son and daughter, contacted the Inquiry and provided statements. Mr Lynn Oldham's wife, Mrs Hilary Oldham, has also provided a statement. The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1981. The medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
At the time of his death, Mr Oldham lived with his wife, Mrs Edna Oldham. Mrs Shore visited him every Saturday and Mr Lynn Oldham would visit once or twice a week. Mr Oldham was healthy for most of his life and rarely consulted his doctor.
About 12 months before his death, Mr Oldham was found to be suffering from diabetes. A few months later he consulted a doctor, probably Shipman, because he had noticed a large lump in his abdomen. He was referred to Tameside General Hospital, where tests showed that he had advanced bowel cancer. After a few days, he was discharged home but the doctors advised that he had a life expectancy of only six weeks.
The Events Leading up to Death
Initially, on his return home, Mr Oldham spent much of his time resting in a chair but, for the last two weeks of his life, he was confined to bed. He was in considerable pain and took analgesic medication. Mr Lynn Oldham and Mrs Shore cannot remember what drugs were used but they believe that they were powerful as Mr Oldham had hallucinations.
The district nurse came frequently and Shipman visited regularly. Mr Oldham's name appears in his visits book on Wednesday, 18th
February, Tuesday, 24th
February, Thursday, 26th
February, Saturday, 28th
February, and Sunday, 1st
March.
For the last few nights of her father's life, Mrs Shore slept downstairs next to his bed. She recalls that either one or two days before Mr Oldham died, Shipman called at the house. Although Mrs Shore was not present during the consultation, Mrs Edna Oldham was. Mrs Shore does not know whether Shipman administered an injection on that occasion. Mrs Hilary Oldham recalls that her husband told her that Shipman had visited Mr Oldham in the afternoon of the day before the death and gave him an injection. Mr Lynn Oldham does not mention the administration of any injections at this time.
Mr Lynn Oldham recalls visiting his father on the evening of Sunday, 1st
March, and, finding that his condition had worsened, he decided to stay overnight. The following morning, at about 9am, Shipman called at the house. Mr Lynn Oldham was not present in the room during Shipman's consultation with his father and he is unable to say whether Shipman administered an injection. He remembers saying to Shipman that he was tired and wished to go home to wash and change, but that he did not want to leave his father in case he died while he was away. Shipman asked how long it would take him to go home and change and, when Mr Oldham said it would take two to three hours, Shipman said that there would be enough time. Mr Lynn Oldham telephoned his wife and asked her to come over from Stockport, so that she could stay in the house during his absence. Mr Lynn Oldham went home to change and arrived back at his father's house between 11am and 11.30am, only to find that his father had died between 15 and 30 minutes earlier.
Mr Lynn Oldham's account is contradicted in part by that of his wife. She recalls going to the house at about 9am. She was surprised to find that neither Shipman nor the district nurse was present. She recalls telephoning the Donneybrook Surgery, and being told that a visit had not been booked for Mr Oldham for that day. She told the receptionist that Mr Oldham was in a great deal of pain and that she wanted someone to attend as soon as possible. She remembers that a district nurse arrived at about 10.30am to 11am, and said that Mr Oldham had not long to live. He died about ten minutes later.
Mr Oldham's name does not appear in Shipman's book for Monday, 2nd
March. According to the visits book, Shipman was
'off'
that day, and no other visits are recorded on that page.
Mrs Shore remembers that Mrs Hilary Oldham telephoned her on the morning of 2nd
March to tell her that Mr Oldham was 'nearing the end'. She went to the house and arrived between 10am and 11am. She recalls that the district nurse arrived shortly after her and, about half an hour after the district nurse had left, her father, who had been in a comatose state for some time, gave a final sigh and stopped breathing. This is contradicted by Mrs Hilary Oldham, who recalls that only she and the district nurse were present at the moment of death.
Mr Lynn Oldham's concern arises largely out of Shipman's prediction as to the time his father would die. He has said:
'Either on the day of Dad's death, or a day or so afterwards, I remember saying to my wife that I hadn't realised that euthanasia was allowed, and she confirmed that it wasn't. Since Shipman had been so exact in his timing of Dad's death, I was convinced, and have remained so to this day, that he killed my father'
.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not been recovered, but the counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman said that he had last seen Mr Oldham alive on 1st
March 1981, the day before death. He said that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that he had seen the body after death. In addition to certifying the primary cause of death as carcinoma of the large bowel, Shipman said that diabetes mellitus had contributed to the death but was not related to the cancer.
The family says that Mr Oldham was cremated, but the Inquiry has been unable to recover the cremation documents.
Conclusion
Mr Oldham was suffering from advanced cancer of the bowel. He was clearly very unwell and had not long to live. Towards the end of his life, he was in considerable pain and was taking analgesic drugs. Although it appears that those drugs were initially taken orally, it is likely that towards the end he also needed injections for breakthrough pain. These were probably of an opiate such as morphine or diamorphine and would probably have been given intramuscularly.
Mr Lynn Oldham recalls that Shipman visited his father on the morning of the day of his death. Some doubt is cast on the accuracy of his recollection not only by the accounts given by his wife and Mrs Shore, but also by what is written in Shipman's visits book for the day of the death and the MCCD counterfoil. Mr Lynn Oldham himself concedes that his memory of events is unclear.
Even if Mr Lynn Oldham's recollection is correct and even if Shipman administered an injection of opiate that morning, it seems highly unlikely that the injection could have caused or hastened Mr Oldham's death. If Mr Lynn Oldham is right, a period of at least two hours passed between Shipman's visit and Mr Oldham's death. Professor Henry McQuay and Dr John Grenville have given joint generic evidence to the Inquiry as to the timing and effect of opiates. If a lethal injection of opiate is administered intravenously, death follows within minutes. If administered intramuscularly, a lethal injection of opiate will cause death within about an hour. That Mr Oldham lived for two hours after Shipman's departure appears to rule out the possibility that Shipman gave a lethal injection. If Shipman did give Mr Oldham an injection that morning, it would appear that it was given for the purpose of relieving pain and was not designed to shorten life.
Mr Lynn Oldham's concern arose because he recalls that Shipman seemed to think he could predict the time of death with some accuracy. In view of the recollections of other members of the family, it seems unlikely that any such conversation took place between Shipman and Mr Oldham on the morning of 2nd
March. It is difficult for witnesses to remember events occurring so long ago.
It seems to me that the overwhelming likelihood is that Mr Oldham died a natural death, due to his advanced cancer.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001