The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Agnes Oldham
Introduction
Mrs Agnes Oldham died at The Sycamores, a residential home for the elderly, Victoria Street, Hyde on Monday, 18th
November 1996 at the age of 95. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was old age.
The Inquiry has taken witness statements from a number of former members of staff at The Sycamores. These were Mrs Sharon Fruhwirth (senior care assistant), Mrs Sally Cornes (support worker), Mrs Marjorie Bradbury (manager), Mrs Ellen Ashton (care assistant), Mrs Joan Williams (care assistant), Mrs Patricia Marro (senior care assistant) and Mrs Patricia O'Connell (senior care assistant). The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Oldham's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and the district nurse diary for 1996. The district nursing records have also been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Oldham was a widow and had been living at The Sycamores for a number of years. She suffered from dementia. In July 1995, Shipman provided a medical certificate for the purposes of an application to the Court of Protection. He stated that the dementia had increased over the past ten years. He advised that this condition would not shorten her life and that she had no physical abnormality at all. The drug history in the computerised medical records shows that Mrs Oldham was prescribed thioridazine, used for the treatment for schizophrenia.
In January 1996, Mrs Oldham was seen at the home by a consultant surgeon, Mr M Cooper Wilson, on account of loss of weight, loss of appetite and persistent bowel problems. He advised that Mrs Oldham did not have cancer of the colon, as had been feared, but was constipated. He advised that the district nurses should attend regularly to give enemas. He warned that the combination of dementia, poor oral intake and progressive constipation could prove fatal.
In June 1996, Mrs Oldham was taken to Tameside General Hospital having sustained an injury when falling out of bed. She was again admitted following a further fall in July 1996.
The members of staff agree that Mrs Oldham's condition deteriorated in the months or weeks leading up to her death, although the evidence as to precisely when her decline began is not entirely consistent. However, it is clear that she was confined to bed for several weeks before her death. She developed painful pressure sores despite the provision of an air mattress and a regime of regular turning. Mrs O'Connell recalls that the district nurse visited Mrs Oldham regularly, to treat her pressure points. Mrs Ashton recalls that Mrs Oldham was on morphine, administered through a syringe driver. She says that the district nurse attended twice a day to replenish the morphine in the syringe driver and change the dressings on Mrs Oldham's pressure sores. Mrs Bradbury remembers that Mrs Oldham was receiving slow-release painkillers and that the district nurse administered them. She does not say why these were necessary. Mrs Marro believes that Mrs Oldham may have had a growth or tumour. The evidence that Mrs Oldham was given any form of opiate drug, whether orally or by syringe driver, is not confirmed by the medical records. Nor is there any indication that Mrs Oldham might have been suffering from cancer.
It appears from the visits book that Shipman visited Mrs Oldham on 4th
November because she had
'TAKEN A TURN FOR THE WORSE'
. Shipman visited again on 5th
November. The medical records confirm the visits but do not explain the nature of the problem save that the expression
'terminal care'
appears. Shipman visited again on 7th
, 11th
and 15th
November, although no further details as to her condition are provided in the computerised medical records.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Bradbury recalls that Shipman visited Mrs Oldham about three hours before her death, at which time she was conscious and was taking fluids. Mrs Ashton, who was the care worker chiefly involved in looking after Mrs Oldham, was off duty at the time of the death.
Mrs Cornes does not remember seeing Shipman at the home on 18th
November. She recalls that at about 5pm she went in to check on Mrs Oldham. While she was there, she saw Mrs Oldham's head fall slightly to one side, as if she had gone to sleep. Mrs Cornes thought that Mrs Oldham might have died and fetched the manager on duty.
There is an entry in the visits book for 18th
November which says:
'Agnes Oldham'
.
Then, on the line below and in a different pen, appears:
'5.30 Agnes Oldham - died - late visit'
.
A note in the computerised general practitioner records for 18th
November says the following:
'Terminal care
dehydrated'
.
An audit trail of the computer has revealed that that entry was created at 3.32pm on 18th
November. It appears to me highly likely that Shipman visited Mrs Oldham at some time on 18th
November, while she was still alive, and that he (or possibly a member of his staff) made an entry in the records on his return to Market Street prior to the start of afternoon surgery at 3.50pm. Further, it seems to me highly likely that Mrs Oldham died soon after 5pm and that a member of staff telephoned the surgery at 5.30pm to ask Shipman to visit the home to certify the death. Shipman had a busy surgery that day and would not have been free to leave until about 6pm.
The final two entries in the computerised medical records relate to Shipman's examination of the body and the confirmation that Mrs Oldham had died. The entries are dated 19th
November 1996, the day after death, and were made shortly after 8.30am. It would appear that Shipman made those entries on arrival at the surgery the day after death. They relate back to a visit he probably made on his way home the previous evening.
Certification
The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') records that Mrs Cornes was the informant in relation to Mrs Oldham's death. She is said to have been present at the moment of Mrs Oldham's death.
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). The MCCD and its counterfoil are in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman certified that the cause of death was old age and that congestive heart failure and hypertension had contributed to death. It is possible that Shipman wrote hypotension rather than hypertension. The handwriting is unclear on both the MCCD and its counterfoil. The registrar interpreted the word as hypertension. Shipman stated that he had last seen Mrs Oldham alive on the day of her death. He said a post-mortem examination would not be held and that he had seen the body after death. The MCCD is dated 19th
November 1996.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He said that Mrs Oldham had died at 5.20pm on 18th
November and that he had attended her during her last illness for three months. He said that he had last seen her alive three hours before she died and had seen her body an hour after death. He said that he had carried out a complete external examination. He gave the cause of death as old age and the mode of death as:
'Coma
on off for 4 days'
.
He said that his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and those of the staff. When asked who had been present at the moment of death, he said:
'no one alive 17.00 checked 17.20 dead'
. Form B is dated 20th
November 1996.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered Mrs Oldham's medical records and then, separately, the cremation forms. He concluded on the basis of both that the death was not suspicious.
Conclusion
In my view, it is likely that Mrs Oldham died a natural death.
The recollections of the staff are not consistent with each other, or with the medical records. It is clear that Mrs Oldham declined gradually and I do not think that her death on 18th
November was either sudden or unexpected. However, that does not necessarily mean that the death was natural. Shipman visited Mrs Oldham on the day of the death. It appears that he was probably at the home in the late morning or early afternoon, a few hours before Mrs Oldham died. That the death did not follow within an hour of the visit means that I can rule out the possibility that Shipman gave Mrs Oldham a lethal injection of opiate. If he had, she would have died rather sooner than she did. That leaves open the possibility that Shipman gave Mrs Oldham a non-lethal dose of opiate or a substantial dose of some other sedative-type drug, such as Largactil, which might have had the effect of hastening the death of a patient as frail as Mrs Oldham. If he did, it would not be possible to say whether he did so because he genuinely believed that the drug was necessary to keep Mrs Oldham comfortable or whether he deliberately gave such a dose as would hasten the end.
There is no evidence that Shipman did give Mrs Oldham any drug which could have hastened her death. There is a possibility that he might have done. In my view, it is far more likely that Mrs Oldham died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001