The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Bianka Pomfret
Introduction
Mrs Bianka Pomfret died on 10th
December 1997 at the age of 49. At post-mortem examination after exhumation of her body in 1998, the morphine levels in her tissues were consistent with the administration of a fatal dose.
The Circumstances of the Death
Mrs Pomfret was a divorcee and suffered from a depressive illness. Those who saw her in the few days before her death were aware that she was chesty and was expecting a visit from the doctor. During the morning of 10th
December 1997, her neighbour, Mr Paul Graham, saw her looking out of her lounge window. At about 5pm that day, Mrs Susan Adshead, a community mental health support worker, called to visit Mrs Pomfret but there was no reply to her knock. On looking through the window, she could see Mrs Pomfret on the sofa. When Mrs Pomfret's son, William, was brought, he found his mother was dead. She was fully clothed and looked relaxed. A half-drunk cup of coffee and a burned out cigarette were on the table beside her. Mr Pomfret called an ambulance. The paramedics summoned Shipman.
Mr Pomfret said that, when Shipman arrived, he said that he had visited Mrs Pomfret at about 12.30pm that day, because she had telephoned to say that she was unwell. She had told him she was suffering from chest pains. He did not mention any treatment. He said he had told her to make an appointment to see him again if need be. He now thought she had had a heart attack later in the day. He told Mr Pomfret and his wife that Mrs Bianka Pomfret had been suffering from angina for about ten months. They were very surprised at that. Shipman said that Mrs Pomfret's depression, medication and smoking habit had all played a part in her death.
The Defence Case
Shipman's account, which the jury must have rejected, was that Mrs Pomfret had requested a visit on 10th
December. On his arrival, she told him that she had had chest pain on several occasions and gave him details of three such episodes which had occurred in the past. It sounded to him as though she had angina so he offered her glycerine trinitrate to see if it afforded her any relief. She refused it, saying that she already took too many tablets. He told her that she ought to be referred to a cardiologist but she refused. He advised her to make an appointment for an electrocardiogram (ECG) and left. She came to the door to wave him off.
Shipman went back to the surgery and made several entries in the records. One was for that day's visit but others were backdated entries. He said that his intention was to reflect the history of the previous episodes of chest pain about which Mrs Pomfret had told him. He said that he had no intention to create a misleading impression. In fact, he made three misleading entries in the records spread over a period of nine months. These were false and were designed to lend credence to his contention that Mrs Pomfret had been suffering from heart disease over that period. Some entries contained blood pressure readings, which he could not possibly have recalled so long after the event. Also, some contained comments (such as 'seems better') which were designed to give the flavour of contemporaneity. By the time he came to give evidence, it had been discovered that these entries had been backdated.
In evidence, Shipman said that, when summoned to the house later that day, he had seen the body and an ECG trace taken by the paramedics, which showed that Mrs Pomfret was dead. He thought she must have had a coronary thrombosis. He offered the family a post-mortem examination but they refused.
The Aftermath
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), stating that death was due to coronary thrombosis with ischaemic heart disease as an underlying cause. He said that smoking and depressive illness had contributed to the death but were not related to the immediate cause of death.
The following day, Shipman spoke to Dr Tait, the consultant psychiatrist responsible for Mrs Pomfret's care. Dr Alan Tait made a written note of the conversation at the time. Shipman told him that he had seen Mrs Pomfret on 8th
December and that she had complained of chest pains which could have been angina. He arranged an ECG but the results were not significant. He had seen her the next day and she had been cheerful. On 10th
December, he had found her collapsed with a 'thready' pulse and she had proceeded to 'asystole'. She had been resuscitated and defibrillated but had died. He said that this was a natural death and there was no reason for a post-mortem examination. In effect, Shipman gave Dr Tait a completely different account of events from that which he had given to Mr Pomfret and which he later gave to the jury.
The Expert Evidence
At post-mortem examination, Dr Rutherford found no natural cause of death. There was no significant narrowing of the arteries, nor any heart disease nor any sign of intracranial bleeding. In evidence, he said that the morphine found in the body tissues must have been administered while Mrs Pomfret was alive. In his opinion, the cause of death was morphine poisoning and this was not challenged.
Dr John Grenville said that, when the false backdated records were taken out of account, there was nothing in the records to explain Mrs Pomfret's sudden death. This death should have been reported to the coroner.
Comment
The death is a clear case of morphine poisoning but, even if the evidence of morphine in the body is taken out of account, there remain a number of significant factors:
This was a sudden death, which was discovered shortly after a visit from Shipman at which he saw the patient alone. No one saw or spoke to Mrs Pomfret after Shipman's visit.
Shipman told the family that Mrs Pomfret had refused treatment that he had advised. Shipman often said this of patients whom he had killed.
Shipman gave a quite different account to Dr Tait from that which he had given to the family.
Mrs Pomfret's position and peaceful appearance in death were not typical of those seen in a patient who has suffered a heart attack. They were entirely typical of those seen in many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by diamorphine injection.
When the falsified entries were excluded, the medical records did not support Shipman's stated opinion of the medical cause of death.
The family says that Shipman did not offer a post-mortem but Shipman said that he had offered the family a post-mortem but they had refused it. This particular conflict of evidence is found again and again in cases where Shipman is suspected of killing a patient. In any event, it was not for Shipman to offer the family a post-mortem examination. It was his duty to decline to sign the MCCD if he was not sufficiently confident that he knew the cause of death. On his story, he could not have been sufficiently sure that Mrs Pomfret had had a heart attack and the death should have been reported to the coroner.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001