The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Elsie Platt
Introduction
Mrs Elsie Platt died at her home, 309 Stockport Road, Gee Cross, Hyde on Wednesday, 9th
February 1994. She was 73 and had lived alone since the death of her husband, in a road traffic accident, in March 1992. Following his death, Mrs Platt became very close to her sister-in-law, Mrs Kathleen Grundy, who was murdered by Shipman in June 1998. Mrs Platt had been a patient of Shipman since he arrived in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She appeared to have confidence in him. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to congestive heart failure and ischaemic heart disease.
In October 1998, Mr David Platt, Mrs Platt's son and Mrs Grundy's nephew, contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances of his mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Platt, Mr Geoffrey Ridgway (a neighbour), Mrs Jessie Hill (a friend of Mrs Platt) and Dr Alan Banks.
There was no prosecution in connection with Mrs Platt's death but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Platt, who gave oral evidence at a hearing on 9th
October 2001. Mr Ridgway and Mrs Hill have died. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Platt's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents covering the relevant period.
Personal Background
Mr Platt lived some distance away from his mother but spoke to her about twice a week and visited her every month or two.
Mrs Platt's medical records disclose that she had suffered from hypothyroidism for many years, together with a hiatus hernia. In 1990, she had been referred to hospital because of a persistent cough and was diagnosed as having ischaemic heart disease and left ventricular failure. Thereafter, she was monitored regularly at Tameside General Hospital and her progress can be traced through a series of letters to Shipman from the hospital. In August 1991, her congestive cardiac failure was described as
'very stable at the present time'
. Her cough was still persisting in February 1992. Following her husband's death in March 1992, Mrs Platt was noted to be depressed and anxious and to have lost weight. Her condition had not changed in December 1992. In February 1993, Shipman was sufficiently concerned about her condition to refer her to the hospital again. She was said to be depressed but her physical conditions were well controlled. A further hospital consultation followed in May, and the last before her death was in September 1993 when her congestive heart failure was said to be
'doing fine'
, although she was still losing weight.
The Events Leading up to the Day of the Death
It appears from the medical and surgery records that the last occasion on which Mrs Platt saw Shipman was on 30th
December 1993, when, according to the appointments sheet, she had an appointment to see Shipman in the surgery. There is no entry for this date in the handwritten medical records. Rather strangely, there is an entry on the computer for that day, which suggests that Shipman saw her at home and that she had a cold. I think it more likely that the surgery appointments sheet is accurate and that she came to the surgery. This was six weeks before her death.
In the last few weeks of her life, Mrs Platt seemed, at last, to be pulling out of the depression which had followed the loss of her husband. Mr Platt thought she was becoming more positive about life and more cheerful. She was beginning to make plans. He last saw his mother on Sunday, 6th
February, three days before her death, when he and his wife spent the afternoon and evening with her. They found her brighter than she had been for a long time and she seemed to have filled out and put on a little weight.
On 8th
February, Mrs Platt had an appointment to see Shipman at the surgery at 4pm. However, she cancelled it. The appointments sheet for that day has an entry in her name, which has been obliterated and another name written over the top. Mrs Grundy later told Mr Platt that his mother had cancelled this appointment as she was feeling 'sickly' that night. Mr Platt thought that this was probably due to her hiatus hernia.
The Day of the Death
In the late morning of Wednesday, 9th
February, Mrs Grundy called at Mrs Platt's house. They had a chat and Mrs Grundy later told Mr Platt that his mother had seemed fine. Mr Geoffrey Ridgway, Mrs Platt's neighbour, had also called in during the morning. He also found Mrs Platt to be in good health. He left her just before midday and went to Werneth House for lunch.
That afternoon, Mrs Platt was due to go to the shops and market with her friend, Mrs Jessie Hill, now deceased. However, the weather was poor and, at about 1.40pm, she and Mrs Hill spoke on the telephone and decided not to go out. Mrs Hill told the police that Mrs Platt sounded fine and in good health, although she did mention that she had been 'sickly' during the night.
Some time after 4pm, Mr Ridgway returned and let himself into Mrs Platt's house by the back door, which was unlocked. This, he said, was quite usual during the day. He found her sitting in a chair, dead. Mr Ridgway telephoned Mrs Grundy who contacted Mr Platt's wife and Shipman, who came round shortly afterwards. Mrs Platt telephoned her husband at his office and Mr Platt subsequently telephoned Shipman who told him that Mrs Platt had died of a coronary thrombosis. Shipman mentioned that Mrs Platt had experienced problems with her heart for some time, a fact of which Mr Platt was previously unaware. By the time Mr Platt arrived at the house later that evening, his mother had been taken away by the undertakers. Mr Ridgway noticed that what appeared to be Mrs Platt's lunch dishes had been washed up. Later, Mr Ridgway and Mrs Grundy told Mr Platt that the radio was not on when Mr Ridgway found Mrs Platt dead. Mr Platt says that his mother usually had the radio on, for company, when she was in the house alone. She would switch if off if someone called on her.
Shipman's manuscript note of his attendance following the death says:
'Seen at 1750 hs
CT
CHF'
.
I interpret this to mean that Shipman saw Mrs Platt at 5.50pm, at which time she was dead. He diagnosed the cause of death as coronary thrombosis due to congestive heart failure. There is no computerised note relating to the death.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not survived. However, the counterfoil has been recovered and confirms that Shipman certified that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis caused by congestive heart failure resulting from ischaemic heart disease. He stated that he had last seen Mrs Platt alive on 31st
January 1994, nine days before the death. He said that he had seen the body after death and that there would be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He recorded the time of death as
'1600 hrs'
, which is approximately the time that Mrs Platt was found. He said that he had attended Mrs Platt for 18 months during her
'last illness'
. This would roughly equate to the time for which she had been diagnosed as suffering from left ventricular failure. Importantly, Shipman again claimed to have last seen Mrs Platt alive nine days before her death. That was probably not true. There is no record in the surgery documents to support this claim. The last recorded visit was on 30th
December 1993, six weeks before. Mr Platt did not think his mother had seen Shipman as recently as nine days before her death. He usually knew of her visits to the doctor. At question 10, Shipman stated that the mode of death was
'Collapse'
lasting
'seconds only'
and he said that the observations enabling him to answer that question were his own and those of Mrs Platt's sister-in-law, which must be a reference to Mrs Grundy. He observed that Mrs Platt was
'Found sat with newspaper on Knee'
. He stated that no one was present at the moment of death, although Mrs Platt had been
'seen at 15.30 hs. Found at 16.30 hs'
. (The figures 16.30 have been written over 14.30.) Neither the police nor the Inquiry has been able to find any evidence that Mrs Platt was seen at 3.30pm. I am satisfied that the claim that Mrs Platt was seen at 3.30pm is a deliberate lie. If either Mr Ridgway or Mrs Grundy or any other friend or neighbour had seen Mrs Platt alive at 3.30pm and told Shipman about it, it is highly likely that Mr Platt would have also been told. He was not.
Shipman's Movements on the Day of the Death
There is no direct evidence of a visit or intended visit by Shipman on the day of Mrs Platt's death other than the visit that he paid after the death had been discovered. That is not to say that he did not visit earlier in the day. Stockport Road is a very busy road and it is entirely possible that Shipman might have visited and his presence might not have been noticed.
The appointments sheet for 9th
February reveals that Shipman had an open surgery which was due to start at 10.15am and was attended by 14 patients. Although the open surgery was intended to finish by 10.45am, in reality, the number of patients makes it unlikely that it could have ended before noon. Since he would then have had paperwork to complete, Shipman was probably not free to leave the surgery until about 12.30pm. He had a vaccinations clinic at 2pm. The last appointment for that clinic was at 2.30pm and there is an appointment recorded with a fire officer at 2.45pm. Afternoon surgery was at 4pm as usual, although it is possible that one patient might have been seen just before the usual 4pm start.
The visits book shows an intention to visit Armitages. Armitages are funeral directors and I infer that Shipman was to visit to complete a cremation Form C for another doctor. Their premises are situated at 240 Stockport Road. Mrs Platt lived at number 309, which is very close.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Banks observed that it would have been impossible for Shipman to diagnose death from coronary thrombosis, bearing in mind the information supposedly available to him and the length of time since he had seen Mrs Platt.
Professor Richard Baker regarded the death as highly suspicious because the medical records contained only the scantiest information about the death. Presumably Professor Baker had in mind that Shipman certified the cause of death despite the fact that he did not appear to have seen Mrs Platt for six weeks before her death. He was also highly suspicious of the death on account of the content of the cremation certificate.
I take into account the generic evidence of Dr Grenville who has explained that patients who have died as the result of a coronary thrombosis are not usually found sitting peacefully in a chair, as though asleep.
Conclusion
There are a number of suspicious features surrounding this death.
Mrs Platt had a medical history of ischaemic heart disease and left ventricular failure. She must have faced a greater than normal risk of dying as the result of a heart attack. Although her cardiac conditions were well controlled by medication and she was well shortly before her death, a sudden cardiac death was a real possibility. Having said that, there is a good reason to think that this was not a cardiac death. Mrs Platt's appearance did not suggest such a death. On the contrary, her appearance was entirely typical of that of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of diamorphine.
There is no direct evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Platt while she was alive on 9th
February. However, there are a number of snippets of evidence, each of which suggests that he might have done. When considered together, they are suggestive of a visit, which, if it happened, took place in the early afternoon.
Shipman was due to visit Armitages, whose premises are very close to Mrs Platt's house.
Shipman knew that Mrs Platt was unwell, as she had cancelled her surgery appointment the previous day. This would put her into his mind and give him a reason, genuine or ulterior, to pay her a visit.
Mrs Platt's radio was off, which suggests that she might have put it off when a visitor arrived and have been unable to put it on when the visitor departed.
Shipman lied on Form B, claiming that he knew that Mrs Platt had died at 4pm and that someone had seen her alive at 3.30pm. If, as I suspect, Shipman visited some time before 3.30pm and did not know whether he had been observed, he would be anxious to create the impression that Mrs Platt was alive and well after he had left. In any event, Shipman could not have made a reliable estimate of the time of death, unless he had been present. That he should pretend to do so confirms my view that he was anxious to distance himself from the death.
This is not a straightforward case. The evidence falls short of that which would be required to convict Shipman of murder. Nonetheless, when this case is considered against the background of Shipman's proven behaviour, I am persuaded that it is likely that he did visit Mrs Platt on 9th
February and that her death was due to his administration of a lethal dose of opiate, almost certainly diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001