The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Alice Prestwich
Introduction
Mrs Alice Prestwich died at her home, 12 Ogden Court, Frank Street, Hyde on Thursday, 20th
October 1988 at the age of 69. She had been a patient of Shipman for a number of years. He certified the cause of her death to be coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In October 1998, the resident manager of Ogden Court, Mrs Sandra Christine Simpson, expressed concerns to the police about the circumstances of Mrs Prestwich's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Simpson and Mrs Prestwich's son, Mr Brian Prestwich.
An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mr Prestwich and Mrs Simpson. The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death, the cremation certificate, Shipman's visits book for 1988 and Mrs Simpson's work diary for the relevant period. Mrs Prestwich's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Prestwich was a widow and lived alone, but she and her son were very close. He used to run a stall at Hyde Market Centre and she would visit him there every morning at 7am, bringing toasted sandwiches and a flask of tea. She would also help in setting up the stall before leaving to do her shopping. She would return later with more food. Mr Prestwich has described his mother as a very active lady whose general state of health was 'fine'. She did, however, suffer with arthritis in her knees. Mr Prestwich was unaware that his mother had a heart condition and, as far as he was concerned, she was a fit and healthy person who was able to walk everywhere she went. He does not mention the problems referred to below. No doubt, with the passage of time, he has forgotten about them.
Mrs Simpson's diary contains the following entries for the weeks before she died, which suggest that Mrs Prestwich had other medical problems that affected her ability to get about, though none of them apparently serious.
'
Friday 19th August 1988
No 12 - visiting her G.P. with regard to her
eyes, and her treatment at hospital
Tuesday 6th September 1988
8.10am No 12 telephoned me feeling very unwell,
very upset. I telephoned her G.P. at 8.30am. he came
at 8.40am diagnosed acute vertigo
Wednesday 7th September 1988
No 12 a little better but still shaky
Thursday 8th September 1988
No 12. much better to-day
Friday 9th September 1988
No 12 - Feeling better, going out to-day
Tuesday 27th September 1988
No 12 -Thinks she's got gastro-enteritis
Wednesday 28th September 1988
No 12 - is still not well (upset tummy)
Thursday 29th September 1988
No 12 - Still not feeling too good, but going out
to-day to pay her rent
Friday 30th September 1988
No 12 - Has visited her G.P. (gastro enteristis)
(
sic
)
Tuesday 4th October 1988
No 12 - Back on feet better today
Friday 14th October 1988
No 12 - Going to hospital for check up
Monday 17th October 1988
No 12. Sleeping out to-night at her sons
Wednesday 19th October
No 12 - Going into hospital to-morrow for eye operation'
.
Shipman's diary reveals no visit between the end of August and the day of death except for 6th
September. It is consistent, therefore, with Mrs Simpson's diary.
The Day of the Death
Mr Prestwich is not sure whether his mother visited him at the market on the morning of the day that she died. He has told the Inquiry, however, that she definitely visited him on the day before her death. They chatted as normal and Mrs Prestwich seemed 'fine'. She did not mention feeling unwell and Mr Prestwich had no concerns about her health.
Mrs Simpson told the police that, at about 9am on the morning of Thursday, 20th
October 1988, she spoke to Mrs Prestwich, who said that her knees were hurting and that she either had telephoned the doctor to ask him to visit or was going to do so. The following entry appears in Mrs Simpson's diary:
'Thursday 20th October 1988
No 12 - legs very swollen and painful sent for G.P.'
.
Mrs Prestwich's name appears in Shipman's visits book for the day of her death. The entry was probably either made or completed after the visit because it reads:
'Alice Prestwich 12 Ogden Court Died'
.
Mrs Simpson continued with her duties and, at about 11.30am, was approached by her husband who informed her that Shipman wished to see her in Mrs Prestwich's flat. Mrs Simpson rushed to Mrs Prestwich's flat and, as she pushed the door to the flat open, saw Shipman standing in the hallway. He immediately said:
'She's dead. She died as I was examining her'
.
Mrs Simpson was amazed by Shipman's announcement. She went into the flat and saw Mrs Prestwich sitting upright in an armchair in the living room, wearing her nightgown. She was seated in a 'relaxed position' with her arms and legs spread open. Shortly afterwards, as they were walking down the corridor away from Mrs Prestwich's flat, Mrs Simpson asked Shipman whether he was sure that Mrs Prestwich had died, because her only complaint that morning had been of sore knees. Shipman replied, 'Yeah, but we'll go back and check her if you want. I wouldn't want her waking up in the Chapel of Rest'. Shipman's behaviour concerned Mrs Simpson because he seemed so unconcerned that Mrs Prestwich, who had called him only with regard to her knees, had died during an examination. Shipman then said to Mrs Simpson, 'I'll leave it with you then', and left Ogden Court.
Later that day, Mrs Simpson went to Hyde market and informed Mr Prestwich that his mother had been taken ill. While they walked back to Ogden Court, she broke the news to him that his mother had died. Mr Prestwich was devastated and broke down. He could not believe that his mother had died so suddenly. Mrs Simpson told him that Shipman had been present at the time of the death. Mr Prestwich says that knowing that she had been looked after gave him a sense of relief.
Mr Prestwich saw his mother sitting on the edge of her settee, with her head down. She looked as though she was asleep, except that she was sitting forward. He told the Inquiry that she was fully dressed, wearing a skirt and a top.
A second entry in Mrs Simpson's diary for 20th
October reads as follows:
'11.40 Dr Shipman came for me Mrs Prestwichdied as he was examining her. I went to themarket to get her son, explained what had happenedon the way back, he was devastated, I stayed with himin the flat until the undertaker took her away, thenI ran him home (he was in no state to drive) to informhis wife. I told Mrs Prestwich's special friend first, thenI told all 'inside' tenants in turn'
.
Certification
Shipman subsequently completed Form B of the cremation certificate and stated that death had occurred at 11.20am on 20th
October 1988, although he initially wrote 25th
November 1988. He said that he had been the ordinary medical attendant of Mrs Prestwich for three years and had attended her during her last illness for a period of 30 minutes. He said that he last saw her alive immediately before death, and made a complete external examination of the body immediately after death. The cause of death was coronary thrombosis with ischaemic heart disease as the morbid condition giving rise to the immediate cause. Ischaemic heart disease cannot have been 'the last illness' referred to. The mode of death was said to be collapse of only minutes' duration. Shipman admitted that he alone was present at the moment of death.
Conclusion
There are highly suspicious features surrounding this death.
First, the death occurred in Shipman's presence, supposedly of a heart attack. Mrs Prestwich had asked for a visit by Shipman because she had pains in her knees, not because she was suffering from anything that sounded like a cardiac problem. Although it is not possible, in the absence of the medical records, to say with certainty that Mrs Prestwich did not have any heart disease, her son was not aware of any. Moreover, Mrs Simpson's records do not suggest any recent heart problems. They suggest an underlying problem connected with eyes, an attack of vertigo in early September, and a gastric upset in late September. During October, Mrs Prestwich had been well. That Mrs Prestwich should suffer a heart attack at the very moment when Shipman came to visit her on account of her knees is stretching credibility beyond its limits. Other doctors find that patients do not die suddenly in their presence. With Shipman, this seemed to happen frequently.
According to the information supplied by Shipman in Form B, he attended Mrs Prestwich for the last half hour of her life. If she did suffer a coronary thrombosis, one would have expected him to try to revive her and to have summoned assistance, first by pulling the emergency cord, and then by asking someone to call an ambulance. That none of these steps was taken suggests that Mrs Prestwich did not, in fact, suffer a fatal coronary thrombosis.
Mrs Prestwich was found seated in her chair, looking peaceful. Her appearance in death was not consistent with the appearance of one who had died of coronary thrombosis. Her appearance was, however, entirely typical of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of diamorphine.
This death bears many of the hallmarks of cases in which Shipman killed. I am quite sure that Shipman was responsible for Mrs Prestwich's death. There is every reason to think that Shipman killed her in his usual way, by giving a lethal injection of diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001