The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Marjorie Parker
Introduction
Mrs Marjorie Parker died at her home, 5 Werneth Avenue, Gee Cross, Hyde on Tuesday, 27th
April 1993 at the age of 74. She was a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to congestive heart failure and hypertension.
In October 1998, during the course of their enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, the police discovered that Shipman had prescribed diamorphine to Mrs Parker. The police investigated her death and took statements from Mrs Parker's son, Mr James Eric Parker, and Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Parker but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr James Henry Parker (Mrs Parker's widower), Mr James Eric Parker and Mrs Susan Taylor (Mrs Parker's daughter). The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Parker's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a further report from Dr Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Parker lived with her husband. She was in very poor health during the last 18 months of her life. Her medical records reveal a history of heart trouble, which appears to have started in December 1991, when she developed chest pain which was diagnosed as being due partly to ischaemic heart disease and partly to a hiatus hernia.
On 14th
January 1992, Mrs Parker was admitted to Tameside General Hospital with a two day history of frequent, throbbing left-sided chest pain. A diagnosis of ischaemic heart disease, hypertension and hiatus hernia was made and she was discharged home on 7th
February 1992. She remained short of breath on exertion and had swelling of both legs.
On 2nd
June 1992, Mrs Parker was admitted to Tameside General Hospital with severe central chest pain. Examination revealed that she had had a heart attack. She was referred to Wythenshawe Hospital for advice in connection with future treatment. On 7th
October 1992, Mrs Parker underwent coronary angioplasty at Wythenshawe Hospital. Although the surgical procedure itself was successful, there were major problems thereafter. She experienced chest pain and developed a major femoral haematoma, which became infected and required evacuation. Following surgery, she was maintained on medication to help alleviate her chest pain and associated congestive cardiac failure, but she remained disabled. Her medication did not include opiate painkillers.
Mrs Parker's general practitioner notes record that she was seen by Shipman on 6th
and 10th
April 1993, when he recorded that she was suffering from congestive heart failure. She was next seen by Shipman on 16th
April 1993, by which time her condition seemed to have improved.
The Day of the Death
Mr Parker recalls that, on the morning of 27th
April, his wife complained of dizziness and was unable to get out of bed without assistance. He did not think that she looked worse than the previous day and she did not seem obviously poorly. Dr Grenville has suggested that she was possibly suffering an episode of hypotension secondary to her heart problem. She was worried and wanted her husband to remain close by. He helped her back to bed and telephoned the surgery to ask Shipman to visit.
There are two entries relating to Mrs Parker in the visits book on the day of her death, the first of which reads as follows:
'Marjorie Parker, 5 Werneth Ave, RELAPSE'
.
This entry suggests that Mr Parker felt that his wife had symptoms similar to those she had had experienced in the past, which would imply cardiac problems. She had not previously complained of dizziness.
Later that morning, Mr Parker went shopping and left his wife with a neighbour, Mrs Smith, who has since died. He told the Inquiry that he was not unduly concerned about his wife's health, as otherwise he would have stayed with her. On his return home, about one and a half or two hours later, Mrs Smith told him that Shipman had visited. In his first statement, Mr Parker said that, when he returned, he thought his wife might have had a mild stroke. He subsequently told the Inquiry that she seemed the same as when he had left her and was fully conscious. He does not know why he originally mentioned a stroke. He did not ask Mrs Smith what Shipman had said or done.
Mr Parker recalls that, after Mrs Smith had left, his wife suffered 'a kind of seizure', in which she started to shake. Mr Parker again telephoned for Shipman. Dr Grenville says that shaking is a very non-specific symptom and could be associated with heart failure or angina. It might also have been caused by anxiety. Mrs Parker wanted her husband to hold her. Dr Grenville infers that she was frightened because she realised that she was suffering from severe heart problems.
The second entry in the visits book relating to Mrs Parker reads as follows:
'Marjorie Parker: 2.55 Passed out on floor'
.
There is, therefore, a discrepancy between what Mr Parker remembers and what the receptionist has recorded. Mr James Parker remembers that Mrs Smith told him that his mother had collapsed. If there was a collapse, as seems likely, Dr Grenville says that this again could have been the result of a sudden drop in blood pressure due to heart problems.
Shipman arrived within a short time and Mr Parker accompanied him into his wife's bedroom. He stayed while Shipman examined his wife and saw him give an injection into his wife's left arm. He does not know what the injection was and I infer that Shipman did not tell Mr Parker what he was doing or why. Mr Parker says that his wife was awake before she had the injection but fell asleep soon afterwards and never awoke. Mrs Taylor says that her father did not mention that Shipman had given an injection until after he had heard of Shipman's arrest. It may well be that Mr Parker had not mentioned it before because he had not realised that it might have been of any significance. Mr Parker now believes that Shipman took his wife's life.
Mrs Smith, who seems to have been present at this time, telephoned Mr James Parker and Mrs Taylor. Mr James Parker arrived at his parents' home within about two minutes. He found his mother lying in bed, propped up by a pillow. Shipman was there and had his hand in Mrs Parker's mouth, holding her tongue. Mr Parker told his son that Shipman was doing this so that she would not choke. Her eyes were closed and she was showing no sign of life.
Mr Parker recalls that Shipman pointed to his wife's neck and said, 'She's not dead yet'. He drew attention to the vein in her neck, which was still throbbing. A short time later, he said, 'See, she's stopped breathing, there's no throbbing in the neck'.
Both Mr Parker and his daughter recall that Mrs Parker looked peaceful and did not appear to have been in pain. It may be that she had been in pain, of course, before any injection was given and that the effect of the injection was to relieve that pain. It is very difficult to say that Mrs Parker cannot have been in pain when she was clearly very frightened by her symptoms.
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) while still at the house. Although he cannot remember exactly, Mr Parker thinks that his wife died between 20 minutes and one hour after receiving the injection from Shipman. His son believes that only 20 minutes elapsed between the time of his own arrival at the house and his mother's death.
There are two entries in Mrs Parker's general practitioner notes for 27th
April 1993. The first, which appears to relate to Shipman's first visit, is in blue biro and reads as follows:
'c/o central chest pain relief
(
with
)
GTN
80/m HS I II chest
OK
Isosorbide dinitrate
20mg T BD'
.
This would suggest that Mrs Parker had symptoms of angina for which Shipman prescribed appropriate treatment with good effect.
The second entry, relating to Shipman's second visit, is in black ink and says:
'15.40
1CT
1CHF (3 with hypertension
IHD
Hypertension
'
.
There is no reference to any treatment provided by Shipman, in particular no note of an injection.
A 30mg ampoule of diamorphine was dispensed against a prescription issued by Shipman on 27th
April 1993 in Mrs Parker's name, but Shipman did not note that he had administered it, or any part of it. Dr Grenville says that, if Shipman was called back to see Mrs Parker, it might have been appropriate for him to stop at a pharmacy on the way to pick up some diamorphine in case of need. However, 30mg is a very large amount to give a person who is morphine naïve. One or possibly two 10mg ampoules might have been appropriate.
The history of Shipman's activities in the spring of 1993 is of relevance. Evidence in the generic drug file shows the following course of events. On 22nd
February 1993, Shipman obtained two 30mg ampoules of diamorphine, one each in the names of Ms Louise Radford and Mr Harold Freeman. Their medical records show that it was not administered to them. On 24th
February, Shipman killed Mrs Hilda Couzens and Mrs Olive Heginbotham. I have found that he used an opiate, almost certainly diamorphine, and 30mg would have been a lethal dose for each of those two women. On 26th
February, he obtained two 30mg ampoules of diamorphine, in the names of Mrs Olive Heginbotham (who was already dead) and Ms Lilian Ibbotson, to whom it was not administered. At this time he would have had a stock of at least two ampoules. On 22nd
March, he killed Mrs Amy Whitehead and obtained 30mg of diamorphine in her name on the same day. On 8th
April 1993, he killed Miss Mary Emma Andrew and four days later obtained a 30mg ampoule of diamorphine in her name. On 17th
April, he killed Mrs Sarah Ashworth and on the same day obtained a 30mg ampoule of diamorphine in her name. On 26th
April, he killed Mrs Fanny Nicholls. On the following day, 27th
April, the day of Mrs Parker's death, he obtained two 30mg ampoules of diamorphine: one in the name of Mrs Nicholls and the other in the name of Mrs Parker. On 2nd
May 1993, Shipman killed Mrs Nellie Mullen. On 4th
May, he killed Mrs Edna Llewellyn. On 5th
May, he obtained two 30mg ampoules of diamorphine, one each in the names of Mrs Mullen and Mrs Llewellyn. Although this series of events and transactions does not prove that he was replacing his stock of diamorphine every time he killed a patient, it is suggestive of that.
Certification
On the MCCD, Shipman wrote that the condition leading directly to death was coronary thrombosis lasting 30 minutes and that a one year history of congestive heart failure and a two year history of hypertension had led to the coronary thrombosis. This information was broadly correct.
Shipman completed cremation Form B on which he stated that death had occurred at 3.40pm on 27th
April 1993. He said that he had attended Mrs Parker during her last illness for a period of three hours and that he last saw her alive immediately before death. He said that he made a complete external examination of the body immediately after death. The mode of death was said to be syncope lasting 20 minutes. He stated that he and Mrs Parker's son and husband were present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker found the death highly suspicious on the basis of the contents of the medical records and moderately suspicious on the basis of the information contained in the cremation documentation. Undoubtedly, he was influenced by the fact that Shipman was present at the death but, of course, he did not have any witness evidence available to him.
Dr Grenville has told the Inquiry that Mrs Parker was at a very high risk of suffering a heart attack at any time, although it is not possible to determine from the medical evidence the exact cause of her death. In his view:
'It is entirely possible that Mrs Parker suffered a heart attack in the early afternoon of 27th
April 1993. If this is the case, and if Mrs Parker was complaining of chest pain, it would have been appropriate for Shipman to have given an intravenous injection of diamorphine, although he should have recorded this. Her subsequent death might have been due to the severity of the heart attack, or to the double effect of the diamorphine. It is, however, possible that Mrs Parker did not have a heart attack on 27th
April and that she was not suffering from chest pain. If this is the case, and if Shipman gave an injection of an opiate, it is likely that it was the opiate injection which killed her'
.
In his generic evidence, Dr Grenville has told the Inquiry that morphine and diamorphine are used as short-term treatments in the management of severe acute pain, for example following severe trauma or a heart attack. In these circumstances the drug should be given slowly and directly into a vein and the dose should be titrated against the patient's response. In practice, this means that morphine should be given at a rate of about 1mg per minute and diamorphine at a rate of about 0.5mg per minute. During the administration of the drug, the patient should be observed, and administration should stop as soon as the patient's pain is relieved. The patient is likely to be rendered drowsy and perhaps euphoric, and care should be taken to ensure that respiration does not become significantly depressed.
It appears to me that there is another possibility, namely that Mrs Parker had chest pain of such severity that it was appropriate for Shipman to give an injection of opiate. However, if he gave an excessive dose and gave it quickly, all at once, that might well have been the immediate cause of death, rather than any cardiac cause.
In Dr Grenville's opinion, the evidence is insufficient to determine whether it would have been appropriate for Shipman to administer an injection or not. From the medical history, it is entirely possible that Mrs Parker died from natural causes.
Conclusion
Mrs Parker suffered from extremely severe ischaemic heart disease and was at high risk of a further heart attack at any time. Shipman was called to see her on the day of her death because she was unwell. His first note of 27th
April records that she was complaining of central chest pain. However, Shipman did not judge her symptoms sufficiently serious to warrant hospital admission.
Shipman was called back to see Mrs Parker shortly before she died. The second entry in the visits book suggests that her condition was serious because she had reportedly collapsed on the floor and this evidence is corroborated by what Mrs Smith told Mr James Parker. Mr Parker states that his wife suffered a 'kind of seizure', in that she started to shake. This could be associated with heart failure or angina or anxiety. Shipman made no entry at all in the records to describe Mrs Parker's condition when he arrived. That is a matter of some concern, as I have found many cases in which Shipman has killed his patient, he had made an inadequate record of the patient's condition before death. However, he was a poor note taker generally and I do not attach great weight to his failure to make a proper note of Mrs Parker's symptoms or the results of his examination. Whilst the evidence is far from certain, it appears to me that it is possible that Mrs Parker had had, or was having, a heart attack and, if so, it is likely that she had cardiac pain.
I think it likely that she was in pain and was very anxious when Shipman arrived. I infer that an injection of opiate was appropriate, provided the dose was suitable and the drug was administered slowly.
We do not know what dose was given of what drug. Shipman made no record. This is a serious matter, particularly if the drug given was a controlled drug such as morphine or diamorphine. Not only did Shipman fail to make a record of the treatment, he does not appear to have told Mr Parker what he was doing or why. Both of these factors give rise to suspicion that he was doing something illicit.
There are two other factors which excite suspicion. First, Shipman obtained a 30mg ampoule of diamorphine in Mrs Parker's name that day. A dose of that size would have been lethal for Mrs Parker. We do not know whether Shipman collected it before or after her death. At his trial, Shipman said that, at this time in 1993, he had fallen into the 'bad habit' of prescribing 30mg ampoules of diamorphine, although he agreed that this was far too much to give a patient as a single dose for the relief of acute pain. He claimed that he used to give only part of the ampoule and would throw away the rest. This explanation is not easy to accept when 5mg and 10mg ampoules are readily available. The series of events and transactions by which Shipman obtained diamorphine between February and May 1993 does not prove that Shipman used a 30mg ampoule of diamorphine to kill Mrs Parker, but it raises a strong suspicion that he did.
The second additional cause for suspicion is that Shipman completed the MCCD at the house immediately after the death. Unless Shipman had decided to kill Mrs Parker that afternoon, it is hard to see why he had the book of certificates with him. He did not usually carry it with him on his rounds. Usually, the relatives of patients who had died had to go to the surgery the next day to collect the MCCD. There is no reason to think that Shipman had the MCCD book with him for another patient, who had just died or was terminally ill. Although another patient died later that day, in Charlotte House Residential Home, it appears that patient died in the late afternoon or early evening.
These suspicious features must be seen in the context of Mrs Parker's undoubted illness and Shipman's very poor standard of note taking. A feature which tends to suggest that Shipman did not give a frankly lethal dose of diamorphine is that it appears that Mrs Parker was still alive 20 minutes after the injection was given. If Shipman gave 30mg of diamorphine all at once, one would have expected Mrs Parker to die rather sooner than that. However, it may be that, as Mrs Parker was in pain before the injection, the dose was barely lethal and took a longer than usual time to take effect. In any event, it appears that she became unconscious immediately and did not recover consciousness. I find it suspicious that Shipman seems to have been prepared to wait as long as 20 minutes after giving the injection. Usually, if a doctor gives an injection to relieve pain, he will wait until the patient has settled and will then leave. Here, I suspect that Shipman was waiting until Mrs Parker died. He would not have waited unless he expected her to die.
Taking all these factors into account, I have come to the conclusion that Shipman probably gave Mrs Parker an inappropriately large dose of diamorphine, intending that she would die that day. It may be that she would have died that day in any event. I think Shipman's actions were probably designed to ensure that she did. The evidence falls some way short of that which would enable me to say that I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Parker. However, I find that he probably did.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001