The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Bertha Parr
Introduction
Mrs Bertha Parr died at her home, 3 Booth Street, Hyde on Tuesday, 11th
November 1997 at the age of 77. She was a widow and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought very highly of him. He certified that her death was due to natural causes.
Mrs Parr's death was one of those brought to the attention of the police during the March 1998 investigation and it was, therefore, one of the first to be investigated in August 1998. The police took statements from Mr Barrie Parr (Mrs Parr's son), Mrs Rachel Ogden (Mrs Parr's aunt), Mrs Irene Haslip and Mrs Ruth Howarth (Mrs Parr's friends), Mr Neil David Harrop (a paramedic), Miss Marilyn Partoon (a registrar) and Dr Alistair MacGillivray (a general practitioner). The police also obtained a report from Dr Alan Banks.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Parr but an inquest into her death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Parr and his wife, Mrs Sandra Elaine Parr, and also from Mrs Ogden and Mr Harrop. Attempts to obtain further information from neighbours who might have seen Shipman visiting Mrs Parr around the time of her death have proved fruitless. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Parr's general practitioner records and to the duty doctor diary, appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period, as well as to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Parr's family has described her as a fit and independent lady who looked after her house and would make regular trips into Hyde to shop. Shipman did not often visit her at home. Her medical records show that in 1980 she was found to have high blood pressure and in 1986 diabetes was diagnosed. Dr Grenville has considered the records and has advised the Inquiry that Mrs Parr's diabetes was well controlled but her blood pressure was rather less well controlled. These two conditions gave rise to a higher than normal risk that Mrs Parr would die suddenly from a heart attack or stroke.
During the last year of her life, Mrs Parr had only one medical problem and, apart from routine monitoring, only one reason to see her doctor. She suffered stress incontinence of urine. This appears to have been an embarrassment, as it affected Mrs Parr's social life but the condition does not appear to have been a serious matter.
In May 1997, Mrs Parr had seen Shipman in connection with her incontinence. On 30th
June 1997, she had a further appointment to see Shipman; his computerised note, which the audit trail confirms was made that morning, reads:
'Had a chat to patient
increase rx to 5 tds'
.
It seems likely that this note refers back to the incontinence problem. On 16th
September 1997, she saw the practice nurse for routine monitoring of her diabetes. It seems likely that the visit to the surgery on that day was Mrs Parr's last. The entry for 19th
September appears to relate to the receipt of the result of a blood test taken on 16th
September, and the later entry dated 3rd
October plainly records the receipt of a letter of the same date from a hospital doctor in connection with her stress incontinence. She was to be referred to a urodynamics clinic. There is no subsequent entry in the medical records, or the practice appointments sheets or visits books, recording any further contact with Shipman. It seems likely that the last time Mrs Parr saw Shipman was four and a half months before her death.
Mrs Sandra Parr last saw her mother-in-law on Saturday, 8th
November 1997 when she met Mrs Parr and Mrs Howarth in Hyde. Mr Parr collected them in his car and, as far as he and his wife can remember, there was nothing about his mother's behaviour that gave him cause for concern.
On Monday, 10th
November 1997, Mrs Parr telephoned her daughter-in-law at about 7pm. Mrs Parr sounded well and there was nothing unusual about her manner. She had been knitting.
The Day of the Death
There is no evidence to show that Shipman visited Mrs Parr on 11th
November 1997. The appointments sheet shows that he had surgery appointments until 10.15am, or a little later if they overran, followed by six patients at open surgery. He might well have been free to go out by about 11am. He was due back in the surgery at noon for an antenatal clinic. That morning, the death of Mrs Florence Lewis had been discovered. Shipman had killed her the previous day. She lived at 41 Mansfield Road, which is very close indeed to Mrs Parr's home in Booth Street. The evidence in the case of Mrs Lewis was to the effect that Shipman probably did not attend that morning to examine the body; an ambulance had been called and the paramedics had pronounced Mrs Lewis dead. However, a neighbour of Mrs Lewis, Mr Mervyn Graham, told the Inquiry that he believed he had seen Shipman outside Mrs Lewis's house on the morning of 11th
November. That is possible. If he did go to Mrs Lewis' house, or even went to her street, he would have been very close to Mrs Parr's flat. It is possible that he might have seen Mrs Parr in the neighbourhood and this might have acted as a prompt for him to make a visit either then or later that day.
Mrs Irene Haslip says that, at some time between 4pm and 5pm on 11th
November 1997, Mrs Parr called to see her and showed her some photographs of her great-grandchild. As far as Mrs Haslip could recall when she spoke to the police, Mrs Parr seemed well and did not mention that she was due to see the doctor.
Between 9am and 10am on Wednesday, 12th
November 1997, Mrs Ogden telephoned Mrs Parr but there was no reply.
It was Mrs Parr's custom to meet Mrs Howarth on Wednesday afternoons in Hyde shopping centre at about 1.45pm. On 12th
November, Mrs Parr failed to arrive. Mrs Howarth assumed that she had gone to visit her cousin in hospital. A little later, Mr Parr went into Hyde town centre and by chance met Mrs Howarth. When he learned that his mother had not met her friend, he and his wife immediately went to Mrs Parr's flat. They arrived at about 2.30pm and could see that the windows were open. When they knocked at the door, there was no reply. Mr Parr then noticed that his mother had not collected her morning newspaper from behind the door. He went to fetch his key and let himself into his mother's flat. He went to his mother's bedroom and found her kneeling at the side of the bed, with her head resting on her right arm, which was on the bed. She was dressed in her day clothes and she looked peaceful. The bed was made and the curtains were open.
Mr Parr immediately realised that his mother had died. He telephoned for an ambulance and a short while later an ambulance and two paramedics, Mr Harrop and Ms Alison Meredith, arrived. The paramedics confirmed that Mrs Parr was dead and put her onto the bed. They contacted Shipman, who arrived a short time later. Shipman picked up one of Mrs Parr's arms and then let it fall. He said that Mrs Parr had probably died the day before and he might also have mentioned that rigor mortis had set in. On their form 'Diagnosing the Fact of Adult Death', the paramedics recorded that rigor mortis was evident. Shipman also said to Mr Parr that he had expected Mrs Parr to live for another ten years and that, if she had been younger, there would have to have been a post-mortem examination. He said that because she suffered from diabetes, a post-mortem examination was not required.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD. He stated that he had last seen Mrs Parr alive on 31st
October, which was almost certainly a lie. Certainly, there is no note of a consultation in the medical records. It appears that when he first completed the section relating to the cause of death, he wrote only
'natural causes'
. He might also have said that hypertension and diabetes had contributed to the death but were not related to the immediate cause of death. It is not certain what Shipman wrote at the first attempt because when Mr Parr presented the MCCD to the registrar at Dukinfield Town Hall, the certificate was rejected. Mr Parr recalls that the registrar said that the certified cause of death of 'old age' was unacceptable. I am not sure that he is right about that, as it appears that Shipman probably first wrote
'natural causes'
rather than old age. In any event, Mr Parr returned to Shipman's surgery and explained what had happened. According to Mr Parr, Shipman then went to a typewriter and typed out another certificate recording the cause of death as
'natural causes'
with
'old age'
as a contributing condition. Mr Parr must be wrong about this as Shipman's entries are handwritten, not typed. I think it likely that Shipman added
'old age'
as the underlying cause of the supposedly immediate cause of death,
'natural causes'
. He also altered the counterfoil. It is not clear when he wrote that hypertension and diabetes had contributed to the death. Mr Parr says that Shipman said something to the effect of 'I can't understand what they are complaining about, they're being funny'. When Mr Parr returned to the Town Hall, the certificate was accepted.
Miss Partoon's initial recollection was that there were problems with Mrs Parr's death certificate because Shipman certified the sole cause of death to be
'natural causes'
. This was insufficient and Miss Partoon said that she telephoned Shipman and informed him of the problem. Shipman told her that Mrs Parr had died of natural causes associated with old age. He then asked for advice as to what he should do. Miss Partoon informed him that it was his responsibility to identify the cause of death and pointed out that a specific cause was required. She recalls that the relatives returned to her with the MCCD, which had been amended to
'natural causes'
associated with
'hypertension'
and
'diabetes mellitus'
. Miss Partoon also told the police that she sought advice from the coroner's office. She does not know whether someone at the coroner's office spoke to Shipman, but he later added
'old age'
as a cause of death and this was accepted. Recently, Miss Partoon has said that she is not sure of the accuracy of her recollection. She does recall that she was involved in the resolution of a difficulty over one of Shipman's MCCDs but she is not now sure whether it was the one relating to Mrs Parr's death.
On 30th
May 2001, the Solicitor to the Inquiry sent a letter to the Superintendent Registrar of Dukinfield Registry Office, Mr Loader, asking him to produce all documents held at Dukinfield Registry Office in relation to Mrs Parr's death, including notes of telephone conversations held with Shipman, the coroner or anyone else in relation to it. On 31st
May, Miss Partoon replied on behalf of the Superintendent Registrar saying that the Registry Office had only the
'Medical Certificate and the register entry'
. A similar letter was also sent to the coroner's office who subsequently informed the Inquiry that they do not hold any information in relation to this death.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate where he stated that death had occurred during the
'mid-afternoon'
of 11th
November 1997. He stated that he attended Mrs Parr during her last illness for a period of two weeks and that he last saw her alive on 31st
October 1997, 11 days before her death. It really is quite difficult to imagine what was the 'last illness'. Shipman stated that he saw the body about 24 hours after death when he made a complete external examination. He gave the cause of death as on the amended MCCD. He stated that the mode of death was collapse of only seconds' duration. When asked to what extent his answers to the questions concerning the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on the statements of others, he did not answer the question but wrote:
'found by son by her bed from body temp etc dead 24 hours when seen'
. He said that no one was present at the moment of death.
In his generic evidence, Dr Grenville explained that it would not have been possible for Shipman to estimate the time of death from the information which was, on the face of it, available to him. Estimation of the time of death from body temperature is a difficult process and lies within the province of an expert pathologist. A rectal temperature must be taken. Shipman often pretended to be able to estimate the time of death.
I have already observed that Shipman's claim to have seen Mrs Parr alive on 31st
October was almost certainly a lie. It seems likely that the last time Mrs Parr saw Shipman was four and a half months before her death.
Dr MacGillivray completed cremation Form C, declaring himself satisfied that the death was due to 'natural causes'. He gave no clue as to what natural cause he had in mind.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville has told the Inquiry that the position in which Mrs Parr was found was consistent with sudden death from natural causes, such as heart attack, stroke, pulmonary embolus or ruptured aortic aneurysm. In Dr Grenville's view, her position suggests that she had suddenly felt unwell and had moved to go to her bed and had collapsed and died. Her position is not consistent with death from an intravenous injection of a lethal dose of a strong opiate and it is not typical of the positions of most of Shipman's victims. Dr Grenville postulates that it is possible that Mrs Parr received an intramuscular or extravasated intravenous injection of a lethal dose of an opiate, felt unwell and then attempted to get into bed.
In Dr Grenville's opinion, the certified cause of death was unacceptable. It indicated that Shipman had no idea what the true cause of death was. All he was doing was seeking to rule out an unnatural cause. In Dr Grenville's opinion, old age would not have been acceptable as a cause of death in Mrs Parr's case since she had not been seriously ill over a long period of time and she did not have multiple organ failure. In Dr Grenville's opinion, the addition of hypertension and diabetes mellitus did not make the cause of death any more acceptable as these did not explain the death. Dr Grenville expresses surprise that the coroner's office allowed Miss Partoon to register the death.
Professor Richard Baker found the death highly suspicious on account of the contents of the medical records and moderately suspicious on account of the information contained in the cremation forms.
Conclusion
There are some suspicious features surrounding this death. First, Shipman certified an unacceptable cause of death. Second, he appears to have lied when claiming that he had last seen Mrs Parr alive on 31st
October. Both these factors raise the suspicion that he was anxious to prevent this case from being referred to the coroner for post-mortem examination. However, such factors, taken by themselves, may be explained by a desire on Shipman's part to avoid the trouble of referring the case to the coroner. The Inquiry has now seen several cases where Shipman entered false details in cremation documents, but played no sinister part in the deaths in question.
On cremation Form B, Shipman claimed to have treated Mrs Parr during her last illness when he had not done so. This must have been a lie, as Mrs Parr had had no illness and Shipman had been unable to suggest any condition or illness from which Mrs Parr had died.
When Mrs Parr's body was found on 12th
November, Shipman claimed to be able to estimate that the death had occurred in the mid-afternoon of the previous day. In his generic evidence, Dr Grenville explained that it would not have been possible for Shipman to estimate the time of death from the information which was, on the face of it, available to him. Estimation of the time of death from body temperature is a difficult process and lies within the province of an expert pathologist. A rectal temperature must be taken. Shipman often pretended to be able to estimate the time of death. Whenever I see that Shipman has done that, as he has done here, I suspect that he might have done so in order to distance the death from the time of his own visit. In this case, Shipman has suggested on Form B that the death took place in the mid-afternoon of 11th
November. Yet Mrs Haslip claims to have seen Mrs Parr alive between 4pm and 5pm. If Mrs Haslip is right, the only time that Shipman could have visited Mrs Parr and killed her would have been in the early evening on his way home from work. If he had done that, he would not have wished to suggest that Mrs Parr had died in the mid-afternoon. He would have been more likely to suggest that she had died late in the evening. It seems unlikely that Mrs Parr did die in the evening. Her curtains were open. On 11th
November, most people would close their curtains at about 4.30 to 5pm. It is possible that when Mrs Parr returned from her visit to Mrs Haslip, she felt ill and died before having the chance to close the curtains. This would suggest that the death was natural. However, it is also possible that Mrs Haslip is mistaken about the day on which Mrs Parr visited her. If Mrs Parr was not in fact seen between 4pm and 5pm on 11th
November, it would be entirely possible that Shipman had visited and killed her in the late morning or early afternoon and had then sought to give the impression that she had died some hours after his visit.
Mrs Parr's position in death was consistent with sudden death from natural causes such as a heart attack, stroke, pulmonary embolus or ruptured aortic aneurysm and was not typical of the position in which Shipman's victims were found. However, it is possible that she could have slumped into this position following a lethal injection.
Mrs Parr was at a higher risk than normal of a sudden death because of her diabetes and hypertension. A natural death would not have been wholly unexpected. There is no positive evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Parr on 11th
November. These factors would suggest that the death was natural, although of an unascertained cause. However, Shipman told a number of lies on the certification documents and showed a distinct reluctance to allow this sudden death to be referred to the coroner. It is not fanciful to suggest that he might have visited Mrs Parr and killed her on 11th
November. I feel unable to reach a positive conclusion on this case and suspect that Shipman may be responsible for the death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001