The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Rosetta Pedley
Introduction
Mrs Rosetta Pedley (known as Rosie) died at her home, 9 Rosemount Crescent, Hyde in late May or early June 1981. The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') shows that her dead body was found on 2nd
June, although it may in fact have been found the following day. She was 67 years of age. She was a patient of Shipman. After a post-mortem examination without inquest, the Deputy Coroner for South Manchester certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia.
In April 2001, the Inquiry undertook a review of the files held by the South Manchester Coroner. When it emerged that Shipman had treated Mrs Pedley, the Inquiry decided to investigate the death.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Irene Whitaker (Mrs Pedley's half-sister) and Mr Ivor Taylor (Mrs Pedley's nephew, whose mother, Mrs Gladys Taylor, was Mrs Pedley's eldest sister). The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1981. Mrs Pedley's medical records have not been recovered. A report has been obtained from Professor Helen Whitwell.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Pedley was a widow and lived alone. Her only son was not close to her and he is now dead. Mrs Whitaker used to visit Mrs Pedley about twice a year. Mr Taylor was not in regular contact with Mrs Pedley but saw her about a year before her death, when she appeared well. Mrs Whitaker last saw Mrs Pedley in a café in the centre of Hyde about five weeks before she died. She had a brief conversation with her and remembers that she seemed well.
The Circumstances of the Death and its Immediate Aftermath
Mrs Pedley's body was discovered some time after her death. The police were called to the house by neighbours who had not seen her for a few days. They forced entry and found her dead in the lounge. The Greater Manchester Police Report of Sudden Death records that the body was found at 11.10am on 3rd
June 1981. It is recorded that Mrs Pedley died between 10am on 1st
June 1981 and 11.10am on 3rd
June. The brief medical history is recorded as follows:
'Only known to be suffering from arthritis'
. In answer to the question as to whether Mrs Pedley had been seen by a doctor whilst living or after death, the following is recorded:
'Seen by doctor at home - Dr. Shipman. Dr. Napier certified death at 11.40 a.m. at home address'
.
The Medical History in a Case of Sudden Death prepared by the Greater Manchester Police also records that Mrs Pedley's body was found on 3rd
June 1981. It was said that she had been last seen alive by her next door neighbour Mrs Whalley at 5pm on 29th
May 1981. In answer to the question as to whether Mrs Pedley was receiving medical attention at the time of or before her death the following is recorded:
'Doctor visiting periodically, issuing pills for Arthritis'
.
The Report of Death to the Coroner records that Mrs Pedley's body was found at 11.10am on 2nd
June 1981. Initially, that date had been recorded as 3rd
June 1981 but the figure '3' has been crossed out and replaced with a '2'.
Mrs Whitaker learned of her half-sister's death when visiting Mrs Gladys Taylor a day or two after the discovery of Mrs Pedley's body. Mrs Taylor told Mrs Whitaker that Mrs Pedley had had a cold and had visited Shipman at his surgery. Shipman had said that she had influenza. He had prescribed some tablets and told her to go home, take the tablets and keep warm by the fire. Mrs Whitaker does not recall being told that Shipman had promised to visit Mrs Pedley at home. She does not know whether or not Shipman visited Mrs Pedley. Mrs Whitaker understood that Mrs Pedley had been found sitting in a chair in front of the fire and that her body had been scorched by the fire.
Mrs Whitaker and Mrs Taylor went to Mrs Pedley's house a few days after the funeral and found Mrs Pedley's armchair in front of the fire in the living room. Next to the armchair was a small table on which there was a beaker containing a small amount of liquid. It appeared to Mrs Whitaker that Mrs Pedley had taken a drink before she died. There was some medicine in bottles on the side table.
Shipman's Visits Book
It is recorded in the year planner at the front of Shipman's visits book for 1981 that he intended to take a holiday from Friday, 29th
May to Sunday, 13th
June. The word
'holiday'
appears on the page for Friday, 29th
May. However, the name of a patient appears in the visits book for Wednesday, 3rd
June and further commitments appear in the diary for Tuesday, 9th
June and Wednesday, 10th
June.
The Post-Mortem Examination
A post-mortem examination was carried out by Dr Bee, pathologist, on 4th
June 1981. Dr Bee estimated that the death had occurred four to five days earlier, which would have been on 30th
or 31st
May 1981. Upon external examination, peeling of the skin around the ankles was noted. Upon internal examination, the lungs appeared deeply congested and consolidated towards the bases. There was no report of histological examination of the lung tissue. Very little atheroma was found in the coronary circulation but a thrombus was present in the abdominal aorta at the bifurcation, producing almost complete obstruction of the vessel. Dr Bee's opinion was that Mrs Pedley's death was caused by bronchopneumonia. Mr Brunt, the Deputy Coroner, accepted that opinion and certified that the cause of the death was bronchopneumonia.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Whitwell considered the post-mortem examination report and the police reports prepared shortly after Mrs Pedley's death. She observed that the post-mortem examination report was brief in the extreme and that the pathologist had not commented on the histological specimens taken. Professor Whitwell examined the sections of the lung and heart and found that there was no positive evidence of pneumonia. She said that bronchopneumonia is difficult to diagnose without histology. It is a cause of death typically found in debilitated individuals or those with underlying natural disease. Professor Whitwell concluded that it was not possible to confirm bronchopneumonia as the cause of death, and she would have given the cause of death as 'unascertained'.
Conclusion
There is very little evidence as to the circumstances of Mrs Pedley's death. The available witnesses had not seen her in the weeks leading up to her death. Her body was not discovered for some days after she had died. Very little is known about Mrs Pedley's state of health. Her medical records have not survived. The witnesses say that she appeared fit and well. The only condition referred to in the police reports is arthritis.
The cause of Mrs Pedley's death was not satisfactorily ascertained at the post-mortem examination.
There is some hearsay evidence that Mrs Pedley last consulted Shipman in the week before she died. She was well enough to attend the surgery and was told that she had influenza and should stay at home and keep warm. There is no clear evidence that Shipman visited her at home after that consultation although it would have been typical of him to do so. If he had visited her and killed her, it would have been entirely typical of other cases in which he had killed, that the deceased person should be found seated in an armchair, in front of a fire. According to the Report of Sudden Death, Shipman saw Mrs Pedley at home but the report does not say when.
Shipman's visits book suggests that he was on holiday from Friday, 29th
May but it appears that he probably spent at least part of his holiday at home. There is some indication that Mrs Pedley was seen alive at 5pm on 29th
May. It therefore seems unlikely, although not impossible, that Shipman visited Mrs Pedley between 5pm on 29th
May and the time when her death was discovered. I also observe that, in 1981, Shipman was not a frequent killer. If Shipman had killed Mrs Pedley, it would be atypical of him to give up control of events and to allow the fact of death to be certified by another doctor who would almost certainly refer the death to the coroner with a view to a post-mortem examination.
Although the circumstances of this death are far from clear and it is possible that Shipman visited and killed Mrs Pedley, I have come to the conclusion that it is likely that Mrs Pedley died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001