The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ethel May Proud
Introduction
Mrs Ethel May Proud died at her home, 144 Lodge Lane, Hyde on Monday, 26th
August 1991 at the age of 94. She was a patient of Dr Napier, who practised at the Donneybrook Surgery. Her death was referred to the coroner who, following post-mortem examination without inquest, certified the cause to be left ventricular failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
Mrs Proud's death did not form part of the police investigation into Shipman's activities. It came to the attention of the Inquiry in the course of a search of files of the South Manchester Coroner for deaths in which Shipman had or might have been involved.
The Inquiry has been in contact with Mrs Proud's daughter, Mrs Margaret Scarfranovic, who lives in The Sycamores, an elderly persons' home, and with Mrs Proud's sons, Mr George Proud and Mr Alan Proud, as well as with Mr George Proud's wife, Mrs Gladys Proud, although no formal statements have been taken. The Inquiry has had access to a printout from the Donneybrook computerised records, the coroner's documentation and the Donneybrook duty doctor diary for 1991. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Professor Helen Whitwell, as well as a supplementary report.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Proud was a widow. Mr George Proud says that, at the time of her death, his mother was bedridden and almost blind. She had recently fallen and broken her arm. She was cared for by her daughter, Mrs Margaret Scarfranovic, who was present at the death.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Scarfranovic told a member of the Inquiry team that she was present when her mother died at about 4am on 26th
August 1991. As Mrs Scarfranovic had recently suffered a stroke, no formal statement was taken from her. However, her recollection is confirmed by Mrs Gladys Proud, who recalls that she received a telephone call from Mrs Scarfranovic at about 4.30am that morning and was told that Mrs Proud had just died. Although Mrs Scarfranovic recalls that it was Dr Napier who came to the house to certify the fact of death, the coroner's records show that it was Shipman.
The Donneybrook duty doctor diary reveals that Shipman was not on call out of hours on 25th
or 26th
August 1991. However, Shipman's visits book reveals the following entry on 26th
August:
'Proud 144 Lodge Lane
Coroner Death'
.
It can be inferred that a call was placed early that morning for a doctor to attend Mrs Proud's death. Why Shipman went is not clear, but it appears that he did.
The Coroner's Documentation
The coroner's documentation is confusing and almost certainly inaccurate. Although the Report of the Death to the Coroner suggests that Mrs Proud had not been seen by a doctor for a period of five years, the Donneybrook computer records suggest that she was seen in Tameside General Hospital on 28th
March 1991 complaining of pain. The Report of Sudden Death, prepared by the police (Form 751), suggests she was seen by an unknown doctor on 24th
August 1991 and that her GP was Dr Napier. All the references to Shipman suggest that, at about the time of the death, he attended once only, at 10.20am, after the death. The confusion arises because the time of death is recorded as 10.20am whereas it is plain that here, as in many other cases, what is recorded as the time of death is the time when the fact of death was certified.
On post-mortem examination, the brain showed atheroma of the cerebral vessels, and the lungs were found to be congested and oedematous. The heart weighed 276g, with severe atheroma with calcification and luminal occlusion. The anterior descending branch of the left coronary vessel was more severely affected than the remainder. The aorta showed severe grades of atheromatous changes. The liver, spleen and kidneys were described as being congested.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Whitwell advised that the ischaemic heart disease described in the post-mortem examination report was sufficiently severe to account for the death. She also said that the circumstances of the death, such as were known, were consistent with death due to ischaemic heart disease. Later, when she had been provided with histological slides (which were not commented upon by the post-mortem pathologist), Professor Whitwell identified evidence of bronchopneumonia, which would also be sufficient to account for the death in the circumstances described.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that this was a natural death. There is no evidence that Shipman saw Mrs Proud shortly before her death. His only involvement in her death was to visit after the death to pronounce life extinct. To the extent that Form 751 suggests that Shipman was present at the death, it is misleading.
The evidence of Professor Whitwell shows that the cause of death was either ischaemic heart disease or bronchopneumonia.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001