The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Leah Pickering
Introduction
Mrs Leah Pickering died at her home, 28 Wellington Road, Todmorden on Monday, 4th
August 1975 at the age of 86. She was registered as a patient of Dr Brenda Lewin, a partner of Shipman at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Practice in Todmorden. Shipman certified that the cause of Mrs Pickering's death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
Mrs Pickering's death was one of the 22 deaths for which the cause was certified by Shipman during his time in Todmorden. Following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's clinical audit in January 2001, the police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Marjorie Standring, Mrs Pickering's daughter-in-law.
No inquest was held at the time of Mrs Pickering's death but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has obtained a report from Dr John Grenville. The medical records have not survived but the cremation certificate has been found.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Pickering was a widow and lived with her son from her first marriage, Mr James Thomas Standring, and his wife, Mrs Marjorie Standring. In October 1974, it was found that Mrs Pickering had cancer of the breast and she underwent a mastectomy. Following the operation, she remained unwell and was cared for by Mrs Standring. She was housebound and was visited by district nurses.
Mrs Pickering's doctor was Dr Lewin. Mrs Standring does not recall Shipman ever visiting Mrs Pickering.
The Day of the Death
On 4th
August, Mrs Standring was at home with Mrs Pickering when Mrs Pickering collapsed. As she was helping Mrs Pickering back into bed, Mrs Pickering made a strange noise and fell to the floor, pulling Mrs Standring with her. The area around Mrs Pickering's mouth and nose was black in colour and Mrs Standring thought that Mrs Pickering had died. Mrs Standring telephoned the Abraham Ormerod Medical Practice and Shipman arrived 10 to 15 minutes later. After examining Mrs Pickering, he confirmed that she was dead.
Certification
Shipman certified the cause of Mrs Pickering's death to be coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. Adenocarcinoma of the left breast was certified to be a condition contributing to the death but not to the coronary thrombosis.
Mrs Pickering was cremated and Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He recorded the time of death as
'11.50hrs'
. He said that he was the ordinary medical attendant of the deceased, that she had been a patient of the practice for 20 years and that he had treated her during her last illness for six months. According to the Application for Cremation, signed by Mr Standring, Mrs Pickering's ordinary medical attendant was
'Dr Lewin or Dr Shipman'
. We know from the generic statements provided by Shipman's partners at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Practice, particularly that of Dr David Bunn, that Shipman did not inherit a list of patients when he joined the practice but assisted the other partners with their patients whilst he built up his own list. We also know that patients at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Practice were free to see whichever doctor they wished and not just the doctor with whom they were registered. There are a number of cremation certificates from this period, where Shipman said that he was the ordinary medical attendant, when strictly speaking he was not. It appears that it was regarded as acceptable for Shipman to say that he was the ordinary medical attendant of any patient who was registered with the practice. No suspicion arises out of this way of completing the forms.
Shipman recorded that he had last seen Mrs Pickering alive on 25th
July 1975. Mrs Standring says she has no recollection of Shipman ever seeing her mother-in-law alive. Whilst it is possible that Shipman had visited on 25th
July and Mrs Standring has forgotten, it is also possible that Shipman falsely claimed that he had seen Mrs Pickering within 14 days before her death so as to avoid the risk that the registrar would refer the death to the coroner. If so, he had already begun one of the bad practices which he was to follow many times later in his career. Dr Grenville says that some doctors are prepared to lie or stretch the truth about when they have last seen their patient alive so as to avoid the necessity of referral to the coroner. It is a bad practice but not necessarily sinister.
Shipman recorded that the mode of death was cardiac arrest of a few minutes' duration. He said that Mrs Pickering's daughter and son-in-law were present at the moment of death. This is inaccurate in two respects. First, Mrs Standring, who was present at the death, was Mrs Pickering's daughter-in-law and not her daughter. Second, Mrs Standring's husband, Mrs Pickering's son, was at work at the time of death, although he might have reached home before Shipman arrived.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville noted the history of breast cancer and mastectomy. In the absence of the medical records, there was nothing to confirm or refute the presence of ischaemic heart disease. However, the fact that Mrs Pickering had collapsed suggested that the cause of death might properly have been given as ischaemic heart disease, rather than cancer of the breast. Dr Grenville noted that there was no suggestion that Shipman had administered any treatment to Mrs Pickering before her death.
Conclusion
This death was investigated only because Shipman certified the cause of death. There has never been any reason to suspect that he was involved in causing the death.
There is no evidence that Shipman had access to Mrs Pickering in the hours before her death. Shipman claimed that he saw Mrs Pickering alive on 25th
July, although Mrs Standring does not think he did. Whether he did or not, there is no reason to suppose that any treatment he might have given on that day had any connection with her subsequent death.
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Pickering died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001