The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Elizabeth Pearce
Introduction
Mrs Elizabeth Pearce died at her home, 34 Byrom Street, Todmorden on Tuesday, 21st
January 1975 at the age of 84. She lived there with her daughter, Mrs Gladys Smythe, and Mrs Smythe's partner, Mr Billy Carline, both of whom are now dead.
About six months before she died, Mrs Pearce moved from Hebden Bridge to Todmorden to live with her daughter. She registered with the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre and was probably assigned to Shipman's list. At that time, Shipman had been in Todmorden for only a few months. He certified that the cause of Mrs Pearce's death was cerebrovascular accident due to generalised atherosclerosis.
Mrs Pearce's death was one of the 22 deaths for which the cause was certified by Shipman during his time in Todmorden. It was one of three amongst those 22 that occurred on 21st
January 1975. Following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's report, the police investigated the death and took a witness statement from Mrs Pearce's grandson, the son of Mrs Gladys Smythe, Mr Dennis Derek Smith.
An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Smith and three other grandchildren of Mrs Pearce, Mrs Ann Elizabeth Price, Mrs Josephine Ryan and Mr George Robert Dobby. Mr Smith, Mrs Price, Mrs Ryan and Mr Dobby all gave oral evidence at a hearing on 6th
November 2001. The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and the cremation certificate are the only relevant documents to survive. All medical records are thought to have been destroyed.
Personal Background
Mrs Pearce worked for most of her life as a cotton weaver in Hebden Bridge. Her family says that she had byssinosis as the result of working in a dusty atmosphere. She suffered from shortness of breath. Her grandchildren also recall that she had severe osteoarthritis in her knees. She was rather overweight and her mobility was poor. By 1974, she was in need of some care and came to Todmorden to live with her daughter, Mrs Smythe. Mrs Smythe adapted one of the downstairs rooms as a bedroom, as her mother had difficulty in climbing stairs. Mrs Pearce could not leave the house unaccompanied. Otherwise, her grandchildren were unaware of any health problem. Mrs Smythe had a large family and there was a family gathering at her house on Boxing Day 1974. On that day, Mrs Pearce seemed quite well and joined in the celebrations.
None of the family witnesses recalls that Mrs Pearce suffered from high blood pressure or ever had a stroke. They do not recall any weakness on one side of the body or any slurring of speech. Mr Smith last saw his grandmother about two days before her death when she seemed well.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Price saw her grandmother at lunchtime on the day she died. She called in to have a chat and a cup of tea with her mother, Mrs Smythe. She recalls that her grandmother seemed well and in good spirits. She was certainly not ill. After about half an hour, Mrs Price went back to work.
There is no direct evidence of the circumstances of Mrs Pearce's death. It seems likely that Mrs Smythe and her partner, Mr Carline, were both present, but they died before Mrs Pearce's death was investigated.
In her witness statement, Mrs Price said that, after the death, her mother told her that she, Mr Carline and Shipman had been present at the death. However, in evidence, Mrs Price seemed very uncertain about whether she had been told that Shipman was present. She had to be reminded that that is what she had said in her witness statement. Mrs Price cannot remember at what time she learned of the death. Nor was she able to provide any further detail of the circumstances leading up to the death.
Some time between 5pm and 7pm, Mr Smith received a telephone call while he was at work. He was on the evening shift as a swimming pool attendant in Todmorden. Mr Carline told him that his grandmother had died. He said that Mr Smith should not go to the house straight away, because his mother was very upset. He did not do so. Mr Smith cannot remember any discussion about the circumstances of the death, which the family put down to old age. He thinks that his mother would have mentioned if the ambulance service or police had attended. It seems unlikely that an ambulance was called, as the nearest hospital was some miles away and the usual procedure in Todmorden was to call out one of the doctors in the case of an emergency.
Certification
Mrs Pearce was cremated. Mrs Smythe made the application for cremation. She stated that the death occurred at 4.10pm. She said that Shipman was Mrs Pearce's ordinary medical attendant and that it was he who had attended her during her last illness. The form does not require the informant to state what the last illness was or for how long it had lasted.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate on the day of the death. He recorded that Mrs Pearce had died at 4.10pm on 21st
January 1975. He said he had been Mrs Pearce's medical attendant for four months. That is not inconsistent with the evidence of Mr Smith that his grandmother moved to Todmorden a few months before her death. Shipman said that he had attended Mrs Pearce during her last illness, for a period of four months. In other words, he was saying that Mrs Pearce had been unwell for the whole of the period she had been his patient. As he certified that the cause of death was cardiovascular accident due to generalised atherosclerosis, he seems to imply that the last illness was generalised atherosclerosis. He said that he had last seen Mrs Pearce alive on the day of the death. He had also seen her within 20 minutes after the death. These two answers suggest that Shipman made two visits to the house on 21st
January 1975, one before the death and one afterwards. As the house was in the centre of Todmorden, not far from the surgery premises, that would be quite possible. Shipman stated that the mode of death was sudden collapse lasting 15 minutes. He then said that the answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and on statements made by Mrs Pearce's daughter. He said that the daughter had nursed Mrs Pearce during her last illness. If nursing had been necessary, it would have been Mrs Smythe who did it, but Mr Smith does not recall that nursing was necessary. Shipman said that the 'daughter and her son' had been present at the moment of death. By implication, Shipman was not present. The family says that the reference to 'her son' must have been a mistake on Shipman's part. Mr Carline was with Mrs Smythe at the time of the death. He was her partner, not her son. However, it appears that Mr Carline looked somewhat younger than Mrs Smythe, so the mistake is understandable.
Dr Stella Brown completed Form C, also on the same day. She said that she saw and questioned both Mrs Smythe and her sister, Mrs Dobby, together, and was satisfied as to the cause of death stated.
Conclusion
The circumstances of this death are lost in the mists of time. Nobody who was present at the death or who knew anything of the immediate circumstances is available to give evidence. The medical records have not survived. Although the grandchildren do not remember that their grandmother was ill in the weeks and months before her death, it is quite possible that she was and that they were either not aware of her illness or have forgotten about it. It is quite possible that the real reason why Mrs Pearce moved to Todmorden to live with her daughter was because she was ill. It is possible that she had suffered a stroke and that the grandchildren do not now remember it. Mrs Pearce was 84 years old and, simply by reason of her age, was at some risk of dying quite suddenly either from a stroke or from a heart attack.
On the other hand, if the grandchildren's recollection is right and Mrs Pearce was in good health, this seems to have been a sudden and unexpected death, although as I have said, by reason of her age, a sudden death could not have been a wholly unexpected event. Shipman's presence at the house on the day of the death might give rise to a suspicion that he had played some part in it. However, we have no idea whether he was there shortly before the death or several hours before. The entries on Form B do not make the position clear. That of itself might be thought suspicious. However, it must be remembered that Mrs Pearce was not living alone. She was at all times under the care and, one would expect, the watchful eye of her daughter. The opportunities for Shipman to do something unlawful would be much less than if Mrs Pearce were living alone.
Dr Stella Brown completed most of the Forms C for the doctors practising at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre. She appears to have undertaken her duties conscientiously, in that it seems that she spoke to Mrs Smythe and her sister, Mrs Dobby, about the circumstances of the death. We have no way of knowing what questions were asked or what answers were given. However, we do know that there would have been an opportunity for Mrs Smythe and Mrs Dobby to express their concerns to Dr Brown, if they had any.
There is no evidence that Shipman played any part in bringing about Mrs Pearce's death. However, he saw her on the day of her death and it is quite possible that he had an opportunity to give her an injection that caused or hastened her death. He was later to become a serial killer and his most common victims were elderly women in poor health. There is no positive evidence that he killed Mrs Pearce, but he could have done. In these circumstances, I do not feel able to reach a decision about the circumstances of the death. I am, however, suspicious about it.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001