The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Annie Alexandra Powers
Introduction
Mrs Annie Alexandra Powers died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Friday, 10th
January 1992 at the age of 89. She had lived there since 31st
January 1991. Her husband died in 1989, after a protracted illness for which he was treated by Shipman. Mrs Powers had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
In November 1999, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mrs Powers' daughter, Mrs Kathlyn Caroline Kaye, contacted the police because she was concerned about the circumstances of her mother's death. She was particularly concerned because she understood that Shipman had been present at the death.
The police investigated the death and took a witness statement from Mrs Kaye. They also spoke to members of staff at the home and Mrs Diane Edwina Lister, Mrs Powers' granddaughter, but took no witness statements from them. One of the staff members was Mrs Betty Brimble, who was Mrs Powers' niece.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Powers but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Kaye, Mrs Brimble, Mrs Lister and two members of staff at the home, Mrs Barbara Meadows and Mrs Helen Margaret Spencer. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Powers' general practitioner records and to the daily and night diaries compiled by staff at Charnley House. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
Mrs Kaye, Mrs Lister, Mrs Meadows and Mrs Spencer gave oral evidence at a hearing on 3rd
December 2001 and Dr Grenville gave oral evidence on 7th
December 2001.
Personal Background
According to Mrs Kaye, her mother enjoyed quite good health and suffered no major illnesses. She 'slowed down' in the later years of her life. She suffered a stroke in 1987 from which she made a full recovery.
Mrs Kaye claims that neither she nor her parents liked Shipman. She said that, when her father was alive, Shipman made her parents feel guilty if they called him out. She claimed that Shipman said, as a joke, that if her parents had been animals they would have been put down. Mrs Kaye had suggested to her parents that they should change doctors but they had said they would stay with Shipman.
Mrs Powers' medical records show that she had suffered a number of physical illnesses over the years and had also suffered episodes of depression. In about 1983 she was found to have atrial fibrillation and was treated for this with digoxin. The atrial fibrillation might have been caused by ischaemic heart disease but was never fully investigated.
The daily diary shows that Mrs Powers was not well on Christmas Day and could not visit her son. She had a bowel upset. But the next day she was well enough to visit her daughter, Mrs Kaye. While she was there, she had a fall. After Mrs Powers had returned to Charnley House, Mrs Kaye learned that Shipman had visited her mother and had said that she had had a further stroke. Mrs Kaye and Mrs Lister visited her several times and remember that although Mrs Powers was unwell for a while, she began to recover her spirits and her mobility before she died.
The daily diary for Boxing Day does not mention a fall. It records that Mrs Powers had a very disturbed night. The next day Shipman saw her and diagnosed a slight stroke. He directed that she should be kept in bed for 24 hours and said he would return the next day. That night she was very disturbed again and very confused. She still had diarrhoea and wanted to get up in the middle of the night. However, the next day, 28th
December, she was much better and Shipman said that she could get up for four hours and should stay up a little longer each day. He said that he would call again on Friday, 3rd
January, by which time he expected her to be up all day. On 29th
December, Mrs Powers did not have much to eat but she took plenty of fluids. Mrs Kaye visited each day and she noticed a gradual improvement.
By 31st
December, Mrs Powers was beginning to eat a little. However, that night she had diarrhoea again and was quite disturbed. This situation continued for a few days. The daily diary note for 3rd
January is missing and it is not clear whether Shipman attended. However, on 6th
January, he visited and directed that samples of Mrs Powers' stools should be sent for analysis. He arranged a domiciliary visit by the geriatrician, Dr H H Wan. Dr Wan came that day and the daily diary recorded that he had promised to arrange an appointment for Mrs Powers to attend the hospital for physiotherapy. Dr Wan reported on his visit by letter dated 9th
January. He noted that Mrs Powers had had diarrhoea on and off for some time but had otherwise been well and mobile. He recorded that she had a stroke on Boxing Day and now had left hemiparesis. She also had swelling of the left foot and hand due to inactivity. There was no sign of heart failure. The pulse rate was 90 beats per minute and was in atrial fibrillation. Blood pressure was 120/70. Her chest was clear. Dr Wan said that he would arrange for rehabilitative physiotherapy.
On 8th
January 1992, Mrs Powers was up all day. She took food at each meal. She was able to walk to the lavatory twice with assistance. Although she asked to go to bed early that evening, the following day she was up all day, took food at each meal and again managed to walk to the lavatory with assistance. That night, however, it was noted that when she used the commode she complained of cramp in her legs and left arm.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of 10th
January, Mrs Powers showed no obvious signs of being unwell. Mrs Meadows made an entry in the daily dairy which said the following regarding Mrs Powers:
'Up this morning, eaten her breakfast'
. At lunchtime, however, Mrs Brimble noticed that her aunt was not eating and was having difficulty breathing. She was wheeled out of the dining room into the entrance hall but her difficulties continued. She remained conscious and did not panic.
Mrs Brimble summoned assistance from Mrs Meadows. They decided to put Mrs Powers on the bed in an adjacent bedroom. Mrs Brimble then waited in the hallway, feeling that there was nothing else that she could do. At 1pm, she left the home, expecting that her aunt would recover. She does not recall Shipman arriving to see her aunt that day.
Mrs Spencer and Mrs Meadows remember the circumstances surrounding Mrs Powers' death. They were called out to the dining room where Mrs Powers had collapsed and was in a semi-conscious state. Either Mrs Meadows or Mrs Spencer, the manager on duty, asked for Shipman to visit. The two women have slightly different recollections of what then happened.
Mrs Meadows said that Shipman was asked to attend as an emergency. She cannot remember if the request was for any doctor to come or specifically for Shipman. She did not think of calling an ambulance but it was still an emergency. Shipman did not come for almost an hour. While they waited, Mrs Powers lay on the bed. She recovered from her semi-conscious state and was able to talk, although she was not holding a conversation. She was obviously in pain. It seemed a long time, but time passes slowly in such circumstances. Mrs Meadows recalls that Mrs Brimble came into the room but was sent away as she was distressed that Mrs Powers should be so ill. Mrs Meadows says that she cannot remember whether or not Mrs Powers' condition changed during the wait for Shipman. Shipman eventually arrived at about 1pm. He spoke to Mrs Powers but Mrs Meadows cannot say whether Mrs Powers was able to understand or respond. Shipman examined Mrs Powers with his stethoscope and said that there was nothing to be done. In her statement made only a week before she gave evidence, Mrs Meadows said that Shipman said Mrs Powers had had a heart attack. However, when she gave oral evidence she said she could not remember that. She remembered that Mrs Powers was in pain. She was grasping her chest. She is adamant that Shipman did not give Mrs Powers anything for the pain. They all stood waiting in the room. At one stage Mrs Meadows asked Shipman why it was taking so long. He replied that Mrs Powers' 'periphery' had closed down but her heart was still going. After about 15 to 20 minutes Mrs Powers died.
Mrs Spencer's recollection is very vague. She recalls that something had happened to Mrs Powers in the dining room, that she had been taken to a bedroom and the doctor had been called. She cannot remember in what condition Mrs Powers was as they waited or whether she was in pain or whether she was conscious. However, she did not think of calling an ambulance. She said that the only circumstances in which an ambulance would be called would be if a patient had suffered an injury or if a patient had collapsed and was not 'coming round'. Shipman arrived about 20 minutes after he was summoned and this was before 1pm. On arrival he examined Mrs Powers with his stethoscope and took her pulse. He said she had not long to live. She cannot remember if this came as a surprise. They waited and, in about 10 to 15 minutes, Mrs Powers died. Mrs Spencer says that she cannot remember Shipman giving any treatment during that time. In particular she cannot remember if he gave an injection for pain. She knows that sometimes doctors do give injections to relieve the pain of a heart attack.
Mrs Meadows wrote an entry in the diary:
'Mrs Powers - collapsed and died
peacefully at 1.25pm this afternoon. Dr
Shipman has certified death
and the undertaker has been informed'
.
Mrs Meadows was unable to explain why she had not written in the daily diary that Shipman was present at the death. She also agreed that the death had not been peaceful, but she said that that was the way she always wrote about a death.
Mrs Kaye's recollection is that she received a telephone call advising her to come to the home as soon as possible. She thinks that she received this call before midday, but I am sure she is mistaken about that. The residents are taken into the dining room for lunch at about midday. Mrs Powers was not ill at that time. She became ill some time after the food had been served. Mrs Kaye recalls that when she arrived at the home, Mrs Meadows told her that her mother had died. She said that Mrs Powers had collapsed and Shipman had been called. He had been present when Mrs Powers had died of a heart attack. Shipman had already gone when she arrived at the home. Mrs Kaye believes that she arrived at about 12.15pm to 12.30pm, but I think she must be mistaken about that, as she is mistaken about the time at which she was summoned. Mrs Kaye was taken to see her mother's body, which was lying in a room adjacent to the hall, covered by a sheet.
In the Lloyd George cards, Shipman wrote:
'12.50 called
13.20
CT
Suddenly collapsed at lunch
Staff present'
.
This note does not make clear whether Shipman was called at 12.50pm or arrived at that time. Nor does it record any signs observed on examination.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been recovered. On it, Shipman wrote that he had last seen Mrs Powers alive on 6th
January 1992. This was untrue, in that he had clearly seen her alive just before she died, but 6th
January was the date on which he had last seen her before 10th
January.
On Form B of the cremation certificate, Shipman said that Mrs Powers died at 1.15pm on 10th
January 1992. He said that he had been her ordinary medical attendant for 14 years and that he had attended her for ten minutes during her last illness. Someone, probably from the office of the medical referee, wrote that Shipman had last seen Mrs Powers alive on 6th
January 1992. Shipman said that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis, with arteriosclerosis as a contributory but not directly related cause. The mode of death had been a 25 minute collapse witnessed by himself and staff at Charnley House. He had been present at the death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker examined Mrs Powers' medical notes and records and the cremation certification and found the death to be moderately suspicious on both counts.
In his report Dr Grenville said that Mrs Powers' episodes of disturbance at night would not be unexpected following a small stroke. At the time of her death, she was at a high risk of sudden death by heart attack or stroke, either of which would be consistent with the picture described by the witnesses. He thought that the most likely cause of her collapse and death was a heart attack.
In oral evidence he explained that the cramp noted in the diary for the night before the death was not of any significance. He repeated that, from the history described by the witnesses, it sounded as though Mrs Powers had had a heart attack, although she might have had a stroke. He did not think it would have been appropriate to attempt to resuscitate Mrs Powers. It was right to let nature take its course. When asked about the need to give pain relief if Mrs Powers had been having a heart attack, he said that she would not necessarily have been in pain.
Conclusion
There can be no doubt that Mrs Powers was at high risk of suffering a sudden death due to heart attack or stroke. Dr Grenville has said that the events described by Mrs Meadows are consistent with a natural death by heart attack or possibly a stroke.
However, I have some concerns about the circumstances of this death. First, Mrs Brimble went home when her shift finished at 1pm. I do not think she would have done so had she been worried about her aunt. I do not think she thought Mrs Powers was about to die and it follows that I do not think Mrs Meadows or Mrs Spencer thought she was about to die. I think it likely that either Mrs Spencer or Mrs Meadows told Mrs Brimble that she should go home as her aunt would be all right. When Mrs Brimble left, Shipman had not yet arrived.
Second, I do not think that Mrs Kaye was summoned to attend the home until very shortly before the death. I think it likely that she was not summoned until after Shipman had arrived and had said that Mrs Powers had not long to live. That is consistent with my view that the staff did not think that Mrs Powers was critically ill until Shipman arrived. If they had thought so, they would have summoned Mrs Kaye sooner.
Third, I am concerned that Mrs Meadows did not write a complete and accurate note of the death. She did not record that Shipman was present and she described the death as peaceful, when her own recollection was that it was painful and lasted over an hour. However, I am satisfied that she did not seek to conceal Shipman's presence at the death. She told Mrs Kaye that he had been there. I cannot think why she should wish to write a bland description of the death in the daily diary. I could well understand that she would not wish to cause distress to relatives but they would not see what had been written in the daily diary. However, I accept that it was her practice to describe all deaths as peaceful.
Fourth, I remain concerned that I have not received a clear account of Mrs Powers' death. The best account I have is from Mrs Meadows. She says that Mrs Powers was in pain both before and after Shipman arrived. If Mrs Powers was experiencing pain, I would have expected Shipman to give her an injection of opiate to relieve the pain. That would be entirely proper treatment, provided that the dose was small and was given slowly so as to avoid the risk of overdose. There is no evidence that this was done. It is possible that an injection was administered and that for some reason the staff members were not willing to tell me. I had an uneasy feeling that neither Mrs Meadows nor Mrs Spencer was being wholly frank.
On account of these concerns, it seems to me that it is possible that before Shipman arrived, it was not inevitable that Mrs Powers would die that day but that Shipman ensured that she did. The evidence is not sufficiently clear for me to reach any positive conclusion. I suspect, however, that Shipman might have killed Mrs Powers.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001