The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Annie Parkes
Introduction
Mrs Annie Parkes died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Saturday, 5th
June 1982 at the age of 94. She probably became a patient of Shipman when she moved to Charnley House in February 1982. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was senility.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions for murder, members of Mrs Parkes' family expressed concern to the Greater Manchester Police about the circumstances of her death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Edith Esther Bailey, Mrs Parkes' daughter. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Bailey, Mrs Lillian Stansfield (the manager at Charnley House at the time of Mrs Parkes' death) and Mrs Patricia Heyl (the deputy manager at Charnley House). The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1982, the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book, the counterfoil of Mrs Parkes' Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and the Charnley House daily diaries and admissions book. Mrs Parkes' medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Parkes was a widow. Her home was very close to that of her daughter, Mrs Bailey. Until December 1981, Mrs Parkes lived at home and her daughter spent a great deal of time with her. However, Mrs Bailey had to go into hospital for an operation in December 1981 and Mrs Parkes was admitted to a nursing home. In February 1982, she moved to Charnley House.
On admission to Charnley House, Mrs Parkes registered as a temporary patient of Shipman. She first saw him on 9th
February 1982. It is noted in the daily diary that no medication was prescribed during the visit, which was probably a routine 'new patient' consultation.
Mrs Bailey saw her mother on Friday, 4th
June 1982 and remembers sitting with her in a communal day room between about 2pm and 4pm. Mrs Bailey says that her mother was well and she did not appear to have anything wrong with her. The morning report in the daily diary, however, records that Mrs Parkes was seen by Shipman on that day and that she had a very bad chest. Penicillin and a cough syrup were prescribed. Penicillin is an antibiotic. The evening report for 4th
June records that Mrs Parkes was suffering from the early signs of pressure sores on her buttocks and that Sprilon was applied.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Bailey recalls that, at about 8am on 5th
June, she received a telephone call from the Charnley House matron to say that her mother was not well. When Mrs Bailey said that she would come over straight away, the matron said that that was not necessary; Mrs Parkes was not so ill. Nonetheless, Mrs Bailey did go immediately and arrived between 8.30am and 8.45am. She found her mother in bed, apparently unconscious. She looked quite peaceful. She did not respond to either sound or touch. Mrs Bailey says that she was shocked at the suddenness of her mother's decline. She stayed until about 1pm, then went home and returned at about 2pm with her brother, Mr Thomas Parkes, her daughter and a friend. She resumed her vigil. Mrs Parkes' breathing fluctuated; sometimes it was quiet and sometimes it was irregular. This situation continued until Mrs Parkes died at about 3.15pm.
The morning report from the daily diary records, in Mrs Stansfield's hand:
'Mrs Parkes, S/B
(
seen by
)
Dr.Shipman, all care given (very ill)
relatives informed'
.
The afternoon report records:
'Passed away peacefully at 3pm: her family
were with her. Dr Bills certified death.
Undertaker came at 5.30pm'
.
Mrs Parkes' name appears in Shipman's visits book for Friday, 4th
June and Saturday, 5th
June. According to the duty doctor transfer book, on Saturday, 5th
June, Dr Geoffrey Bills was the doctor on duty pursuant to the rota for out of hours cover between the Donneybrook doctors. Dr Bills has been contacted and informed the Inquiry that he has no recollection of Mrs Parkes, which is not surprising, as she died so long ago.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman recorded that Mrs Parkes died of senility at Charnley House on 5th
June 1982. He said that he had last seen her alive on the day of her death. He claimed that he had seen the body after death. He said that there would be no post-mortem examination.
The death certificate shows that Mr Thomas Parkes (now deceased) was the informant who registered the death. He was said to have been present at the death, which confirms Mrs Bailey's recollection.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Parkes had died at 3pm. He said that he had been Mrs Parkes' ordinary medical attendant for four months and that he had attended her during her last illness for one week. He said that he had last seen her alive five hours before death and saw the body about three hours after death. (The original cremation certificate shows that the number of hours is three, although copies made would suggest that it was either three or eight.) The cause of death was given as senility and the mode of death was said to be a coma, lasting
'Probably 24 hours'
. Shipman claimed to have provided the answers relating to the cause and mode of death on the basis of his own observations. He said that no one had been present at the moment of death and added that Mrs Parkes was seen at 2.45pm and found dead at 3pm.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered the cremation forms and concluded that the death of Mrs Parkes was not suspicious.
Conclusion
It is now twenty years since Mrs Parkes' death. Although her daughter now recalls that the death was sudden and unexpected, I think her memory of her mother's condition during the last day or two of her life must be at fault. I cannot reconcile Mrs Bailey's account of her mother's condition during the afternoon of 4th
June with that in the daily diary, which records that she had a very bad chest that morning and was prescribed penicillin. That evening, the staff noted the first sign of a pressure sore. That is usually an indication that the patient has been confined to bed or to a chair for some time and is in a debilitated condition. I think Mrs Bailey's recollection must be slightly at fault. I accept that Mrs Parkes' final illness was short and her death quite sudden, but I think it was not quite as sudden or inexplicable as Mrs Bailey now remembers.
There is no evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Parkes at a time when he might have done anything which could have directly caused her death. It appears likely that he visited quite early on the morning of 5th
June. I say that because Mrs Bailey herself was at the home from about 8.45am until 1pm and Shipman did not visit during that time. Yet his visit was recorded by Mrs Stansfield, who wrote the report at the end of the morning shift. She has told the Inquiry that her shift ended at 1pm and that she usually wrote the report at that time. Although it is possible that Shipman visited Mrs Parkes between 1pm and 2pm while Mrs Bailey was away, this seems unlikely.
Even if Shipman did visit between 1pm and 2pm, there is no reason to think that he gave Mrs Parkes a lethal dose of an opiate. Mrs Parkes appeared to Mrs Bailey to be in much the same condition when she returned at about 2pm as when she had left at 1pm. She was still unconscious and her breathing was variable, as one might expect in an elderly woman who was close to death as the result of a chest infection. If Shipman had given Mrs Parkes a dose of opiate between 1pm and 2pm, it is highly likely that she would have died quite soon afterwards, as her respiratory function was already severely compromised. As it was, she did not die until about 3.15pm.
I cannot rule out the possibility that Shipman administered a sub-lethal dose of opiates or a large dose of a sedative when he visited Mrs Parkes on the morning of the day of her death. I think it likely that Mrs Parkes was suffering from a severe chest infection, possibly bronchopneumonia, which had developed over the course of about 36 hours before her death. By the morning of 5th
June, her respiratory function would have already been severely compromised. The likelihood of her dying from bronchopneumonia, a common mechanism of death in elderly people, would, therefore, have been increased had she been heavily sedated. If Shipman did administer a sedative, it would not be possible to say whether he had done it with the intention of keeping Mrs Parkes comfortable or whether he used it as an indirect way of hastening her death.
I think it very likely that Mrs Parkes died as a result of natural causes, although the cause of death might more appropriately have been certified as bronchopneumonia, or some other chest condition, as opposed to senility.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001