The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Marion Platt
Introduction
Mrs Marion Platt died at The Sycamores, a residential home for the elderly, Victoria Street, Hyde on Thursday, 23rd
December 1993 at the age of 78. She had been a patient of Shipman since July 1992. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
There has been no police investigation into this death and no inquest has been held.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Beryl Taylor (Mrs Platt's daughter), Mrs Pamela Jean Ogden, Mrs Patricia Marro, Mrs Jean Marie Lohan, Mrs Ethel Clayton, Mrs Joan Williams, Mrs Marion Rowbotham and Mrs Patricia O'Connell (all of whom worked as care assistants at the home), Mrs Eileen Rhodes (the deputy manager of the home) and Mrs Marjorie Bradbury (the manager of the home).
The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Platt's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period, as well as to the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Platt's medical records reveal that, in 1982, she had a right hemicolectomy for cancer of the caecum. In August 1984, she suffered a major stroke as a result of which she spent about ten weeks in Tameside General Hospital. Her speech was affected and she was partially paralysed on the right side. She required a stick to walk indoors and a wheelchair if she ventured outside.
Following her stroke, Mrs Platt suffered from epilepsy and remained on treatment for this condition for the rest of her life. In 1992, she was found to have a pre-malignant condition of the uterus and she was started on hormone treatment, which she also took until her death.
In June or July 1992, Mrs Platt moved to The Sycamores and became a patient of Shipman. She seemed to settle well and made friends with the staff. Mrs Taylor visited her very frequently, usually four times a week. In April 1993, Mrs Platt's husband died.
During the summer of 1993, Mrs Taylor noticed that her mother was unable to eat very much. She spoke to Shipman about this. The medical records show that, on 25th
October 1993, Mrs Platt was seen at the home by Dr M A Matin, a consultant physician from Tameside General Hospital. He suspected that Mrs Platt might have bowel cancer and indicated that he would arrange an investigation. On 29th
October 1993, a doctor other than Shipman visited Mrs Platt, as she was suffering from acute abdominal pain. She was found to have a bowel obstruction and was admitted as an emergency to Tameside General Hospital. Whilst in hospital, she was found to have cancer of the rectum and underwent a defunctioning colostomy. Dr Grenville has told the Inquiry that this is a palliative procedure and it appears that Mrs Platt's cancer was well advanced. Mrs Platt was discharged from hospital on 12th
November 1993, but was readmitted the following day because her colostomy was not functioning. This problem was resolved and Mrs Platt was discharged back to The Sycamores on 24th
November 1993. Once back at the home, it appears that she settled into her normal routine and her daughter continued to visit her four times a week.
The medical records suggest that Shipman saw Mrs Platt on 7th
December 1993. He has annotated this as taking place at the surgery, although this may have been an error. Shipman has simply noted that Mrs Platt had a colostomy and that she was
'OK'
. He also noted that the rectum was
'OK'
.
On 22nd
December, Mrs Taylor visited her mother at some time during the morning. She stayed with her for about an hour. Although Mrs Platt appeared tired, her daughter formed the impression that she was looking forward to the Christmas party to be held at the home that evening. Mrs Rhodes recalls that Mrs Platt appeared to enjoy the Christmas party.
The medical records show that Shipman visited Mrs Platt that day. He apparently found her mildly constipated and noted an intention to see her in four weeks' time.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Rhodes has told the Inquiry that, at about 2am on 23rd
December 1993, she was woken by a care assistant and told that Mrs Platt was in a poorly condition. Mrs Rhodes went to Mrs Platt's room and found that she appeared to have deteriorated very quickly. Mrs Rhodes cannot now remember what specific changes there were in her condition. Mrs Rhodes called for an emergency doctor to visit.
There is a deputising doctor visits slip within Mrs Platt's Lloyd George envelope which indicates that a doctor attended Mrs Platt at 1.15am on 23rd
December. It is not possible to decipher the doctor's name. Under the
'History and Findings'
section of the visits slip, the doctor has written
'CVA'
and under the
'Clinical Findings'
section the following has been written:
'Not breathless
Not in pain
Resp
Movement + limbs
Aphasic
Chest
Heart
'
.
Under the
'Diagnosis'
section, the doctor has written:
'Carcinomatosis
Old CVA
Colostomy
'
.
Under the section headed
'Treatment'
, the doctor has written
'Adv'
, which Dr Grenville has interpreted to mean
'advised'
. Dr Grenville has observed that the duty doctor's record is inadequate because it does not explain why he was called. The note tends to suggest that the doctor did not feel that there were any new findings, yet this seems to be inconsistent with the evidence of Mrs Rhodes. The home must have been very concerned about Mrs Platt's deterioration to call out an emergency doctor in the night.
Mrs Rhodes recalls that the emergency doctor told her that Mrs Platt would die but that her death was not imminent. In the light of that, Mrs Rhodes decided to wait until 7am before she telephoned Mrs Taylor. However, shortly after 7am that morning, Mrs Rhodes discovered that Mrs Platt had already died.
Shipman was called and came to certify the death. On the reverse of the deputising doctor's slip, Shipman has written:
'Certified
8.20
Died 7.00
1a CVA
2a Ca colon'
.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On this, Shipman stated that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident and that carcinoma of the colon was a significant condition contributing to the death but was not related to the disease or condition causing it. He said that he had last seen Mrs Platt alive on 22nd
December, the day before she died, which is corroborated by his entry in the medical records.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate, where he recorded that death had occurred at
'0710'
on 23rd
December 1993. He stated that he had been Mrs Platt's ordinary medical attendant for a period of two years and that he had attended her during her last illness for a period of four weeks, although it appears that he initially wrote two weeks. It would appear that Shipman informed the medical referee over the telephone that he last saw Mrs Platt alive on 22nd
December 1993. He said that he saw the body 30 minutes after death. The cause of death was stated as on the MCCD counterfoil. The mode of death was said to be syncope and Shipman said that Mrs Platt had died in her sleep. His answers as to mode and cause of death were said to be based on the statements made by staff at the home, who had nursed Mrs Platt during her last illness. No one was said to have been present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Upon his consideration of the cremation documentation, Professor Richard Baker assessed this death to be non-suspicious.
Dr Grenville does not consider Mrs Platt's sudden deterioration in health and subsequent death to be surprising, given her history and general condition.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Platt died as the result of natural causes.
Mrs Platt had not enjoyed good health for some years before her death. She had been disabled by a severe stroke many years before. Then, in her late seventies, she developed bowel cancer. This was already far advanced at the time of diagnosis. The prognosis was poor. It appears that Mrs Platt's condition deteriorated suddenly a few hours before her death. A deputising doctor was called out. The precise nature of the deterioration is not clear, as the doctor's note is rather vague. However, as Dr Grenville has observed, given her underlying condition, her death at that time was not surprising.
There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman had access to Mrs Platt during the period immediately before her death. It appears that he saw her on 22nd
December, probably around the middle of the day when he usually carried out his routine visits. Shipman did not attend during the night at the request of the staff and there is no reason to suspect that he might have been at the home again until after the death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001