The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ada Marjorie Preston
Introduction
Mrs Ada Marjorie Preston died at her home, 183 Grange Road South, Hyde on Tuesday, 9th
October 1979 at the age of 68. The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') suggests that her first name was Ann, but her son says that it was Ada. She lived with her husband. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde and thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cardiac failure due to ischaemic heart disease and mitral stenosis.
There has been no police investigation into Mrs Preston's death and there has been no inquest.
In August 2001, Mrs Preston's son, Mr Geoffrey Preston, contacted the Inquiry to express concern over the circumstances of his mother's death. The Inquiry took a statement from him and has also had access to the visits book for 1979 and the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Mrs Preston's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Preston recalls that his mother had suffered from rheumatic fever as a child and in 1958 was treated in Manchester Royal Infirmary for mitral stenosis. She had an irregular heartbeat. She was prescribed anti-coagulants sometime in the mid-1960s. In 1968, she developed rheumatic fever and was admitted to hospital. In 1973 or 1974, she was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus. He recalls that, for most of the 1970s, Mrs Preston was well.
Mrs Preston remained active until about August 1979 when her health began to decline. She spent the week before her death in bed and she appeared to be deteriorating. Mr Preston thinks that Shipman saw his mother on Sunday, 7th
October when, according to what Mr Preston's father told him, Shipman administered an injection. Mr Preston recalls that he visited his mother that Sunday evening and that she was conscious and talking, although she had a high temperature.
Mr Preston recalls that Shipman visited his mother twice on Monday, 8th
October 1979. The first visit was made at about 10am and the second at about 6.30pm. According to what Mr Preston's father told Mr Preston, Shipman gave his mother an injection on each visit. Mr Preston visited his mother at about 7.30pm that evening. She was conscious, although she was slipping into sleep more often.
The Day of the Death
Mr Preston telephoned his father early on Tuesday, 9th
October 1979 and was told that his mother was sleeping. Mr Preston went to work but, at about 9.45am, he received a telephone call from his father to say that his mother had died. Mr Preston went to his parents' house. He has told the Inquiry that he is 'fairly certain' that Shipman had not been to see his mother that morning. He thinks that, if Shipman had visited his mother, his father would have mentioned it and he did not do so. On arrival at his parents' home, he went into the bedroom to see his mother. Nothing about her appearance struck him as unusual.
There is an entry in the visits book that reads as follows:
'Preston
Died'
.
This would suggest that Shipman was called out to certify that Mrs Preston had died.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD, but only the counterfoil is available. On that, Shipman recorded that he last saw Mrs Preston alive on Friday, 5th
October 1979. A visit is recorded in the visits book for that date and for 2nd
October, but there is no mention of a visit after 5th
October.
Conclusion
It appears from the evidence that Mrs Preston was suffering from a terminal illness, although its precise nature cannot be ascertained in the absence of the medical records. Bearing in mind Mrs Preston's lifelong history of cardiac problems, it seems highly likely that she was suffering from heart failure.
There is no evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Preston within a few hours before her death. There is conflicting evidence as to whether he visited on the evening before the death. Mr Preston says he did. The visits book suggests that he did not and that he had not seen Mrs Preston since 5th
October. However, Shipman's visits book cannot be assumed to be a complete record. The entry on the MCCD counterfoil tends to corroborate the visits book, but the visits book could be the source of inaccurate information provided on the MCCD counterfoil. On the other hand, I cannot be sure that Mr Preston's recollection is right. After so long, it would not be surprising if he were mistaken. I cannot make any definite finding as to whether Shipman visited on the evening before the death.
If Shipman did visit Mrs Preston on the evening before her death and if he gave Mrs Preston an injection, as Mr Preston recalls, that injection cannot have been of a lethal dose of opiate and cannot have killed Mrs Preston. Mrs Preston did not die until about 9.30am the next day, about 12 hours after the visit, if it took place. Dr John Grenville and Professor Henry McQuay have given evidence to the Inquiry about the timing and effect of large doses of opiate. If a lethal dose of opiate is given intravenously, it will cause death within a few minutes. If given intramuscularly, a lethal dose will cause death within about an hour. If a patient is alive for 12 hours after a suspected injection of opiate or sedative, it can confidently be stated that that injection has not directly caused the death.
If Shipman did visit Mrs Preston during the last two days of her life and if he did give her injections, as Mr Preston recalls, it is quite likely that these were of a diuretic, which could be expected to relieve Mrs Preston's symptoms. It is also possible that Shipman might have given a small dose of opiate to settle Mrs Preston if she was in distress. This would be an appropriate and perfectly proper thing to do and would not have caused or hastened Mrs Preston's death.
I am quite sure that Mrs Preston died a natural death and hope that this decision will put Mr Preston's mind at rest.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001