The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Reginald Potts
Introduction
Mr Reginald Potts died at his home, 242 Clarendon Road, Hyde on Saturday, 29th
July 1978 at the age of 83. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Potts' death was carcinomatosis resulting from rectal carcinoma.
The Inquiry has managed to trace Mr Frank Heywood, the son of Mrs Alice Heywood, who was named as the informant in relation to the death of Mr Potts on the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'). She was said to have been present at the death. Mr Potts' medical records have not survived and there are no practice records for the period. The Inquiry has, however, obtained the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, completed by Shipman.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
Mr Heywood says that his mother, who died in May 1985, was a friend of Mr Potts and visited him on a regular basis. She had never mentioned any suspicions about Mr Potts' death and Mr Heywood was unable to help further.
On the MCCD counterfoil, Shipman stated that he last saw Mr Potts alive on 29th
July 1978, the day of his death. Shipman also stated that a post-mortem examination would not take place and that he had seen the body after death. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 31st
July 1978.
No further evidence is available to the Inquiry.
Conclusion
The evidence in this case is very limited and the Inquiry has been unable to find any witness who can assist. That Shipman states that he saw Mr Potts alive on the day of his death inevitably raises some suspicion of his involvement. I note that the death certificate states that Mr Potts had carcinomatosis. It is likely that he was very ill for some time before his death. In those circumstances it would not be at all surprising that Shipman should have visited him on the day of his death. It is entirely possible that Shipman's visit was wholly innocent. However, the possibility exists that Shipman visited shortly before Mr Potts' death in circumstances in which he could have had the opportunity to give Mr Potts an injection which hastened his death. Without evidence from a witness with knowledge of the circumstances of the death, it is not possible for me to reach any conclusion as to the cause of death or whether Shipman was improperly involved.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001