The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Edith Pitman
Introduction
Miss Edith Pitman died at Charlotte House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Thursday, 18th
May 1989 at the age of 86. It is not known whether she was registered as a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was renal failure.
The only information which the Inquiry initially had about this death was the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') which named Mr Arthur Pitman, Miss Pitman's brother, as the informant. Mr Arthur Pitman has since died but his son, also called Mr Arthur Pitman, has contacted the Inquiry and provided a statement. None of the staff at Charlotte House whom the Inquiry has contacted has been able to provide any relevant information.
The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1989 and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer diary. Miss Pitman's medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Pitman never married and lived with her parents until they died, after which she lived alone. She worked until she was in her late seventies and retired only when she became unwell as the result of an eating disorder, on account of which she was admitted to hospital on about three occasions. She was admitted to Charlotte House three to four years before she died.
The Death
Mr Pitman lived in London at the time of his aunt's death and knew nothing of the circumstances surrounding her death. He understood from his father that the death was not unexpected and that Miss Pitman's health had deteriorated on account of her eating disorder. Mr Pitman's father was not suspicious about the circumstances of the death. Mr Pitman believes that if anything had been thought 'out of place', his father would have pursued the matter.
Miss Pitman's name appears in Shipman's visits book for Friday, 12th
May 1989. It does not appear for the day of her death but next appears for Friday, 19th
May 1989, the day after death. Her name appears as the first entry on that date and alongside her name is a cross or crucifix symbol, signifying that she had died.
Shipman was not on rota duty on the evening of 18th
May. The duty doctor transfer diary shows that Dr Bills was on duty and handed over to the deputising service at 10.30pm.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not been recovered, but the counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. On that, Shipman recorded that he had last seen Miss Pitman alive on 12th May 1989, which is consistent with the entries in the visits book. He said that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that he had seen the body after death. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 19th
May 1989, the day after Miss Pitman died.
Conclusion
There is very little evidence as to the circumstances surrounding Miss Pitman's death. We do, however, know that her death was not unexpected and appeared to her brother to be explicable.
The evidence suggests that Shipman had not seen Miss Pitman for nearly a week before her death. It is possible that he saw her later than that but there is no positive reason to suspect that he did. The fact that Miss Pitman's name appears in Shipman's visits book suggests that she might have died quite late on Thursday, 18th
May. If so, Shipman's note in his visits book for the following day probably indicates that he had been asked to certify the cause of death and possibly to complete cremation Form B. If a visit had been requested during the evening of 18th
May, either Dr Bills or the deputising service would have answered the call.
As there is no witness evidence of the circumstances of the death, I cannot say with complete confidence that Shipman was not involved in the death. However, it seems likely that the death was due to natural causes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001