The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Laura Victoria Parkin
Introduction
Mrs Laura Victoria Parkin died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Thursday, 2nd
August 1984 at the age of 81. She was registered as a patient at the Donneybrook Surgery, although it is unclear whether Shipman was her doctor or whether she was registered with one of the other doctors. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was old age.
The police did not investigate Mrs Parkin's death and there has been no inquest.
In Spring 2001, the Inquiry came into possession of a number of Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoils, completed by Shipman. The counterfoil relating to Mrs Parkin was among them. In August 2001, the Inquiry located Mrs Julia Vilette Jones, Mrs Parkin's daughter, and took a statement of the evidence relating to her mother's death. The Inquiry has also had access to the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary and Shipman's visits book for 1984. Mrs Parkin's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Parkin had two children, Mrs Jones and Mr Adrian Parkin. At the time of her death, she was a widow. Mrs Parkin was admitted to Charnley House on 24th
April 1984 from her home in Gamesley, near Glossop. She had had difficulty in coping at home, particularly following a fall she had suffered a few months earlier. She had also become confused and had some minor accidents at home.
The Charnley House diaries chart Mrs Parkin's gradual deterioration. On 5th
July 1984, she was seen by Dr Derek Carroll, who said that her confusion was due to old age and was not treatable. She was to be given iron tablets. On 19th
July, she had a catheter fitted. On 21st
July, an instruction was given that she was to have nourishing drinks and she was given egg and milk for tea. On 24th
July, Dr Geoffrey Bills visited Mrs Parkin as her big toe was swollen and discoloured. On the following day, there appears an indication that Mrs Parkin had developed pressure sores on her back which suggests that she was, by then, mainly confined to bed. These sores were dressed regularly but deteriorated. On 26th
July, it was recorded that Mrs Parkin
'didn't seem very well'
. On 28th
July, some concern was expressed, as she was not eating or drinking much. By 29th
July, she was being nursed in bed. On 30th
July, the doctor was informed of her condition and he left a prescription for dressings.
In the morning report of 31st
July, Mrs Parkin was said to be deteriorating. Shipman visited in the afternoon and prescribed Temgesic to relieve the pain from her back. The tablets were to be given every six hours. The first was given at 3.30pm. Shipman also directed that she was to be given only water. In the night report, it is recorded that Mrs Parkin had a convulsion at 6am.
Mrs Jones believes that she last saw her mother during the morning of 31st
July. Mrs Parkin was sitting in a chair in the morning room. Mrs Parkin did not at first recognise her daughter but in due course she did. Mrs Jones did not think her mother was seriously ill and was not unduly worried about her, although she thought that she seemed to be 'miles away'. I do wonder whether Mrs Jones can be right when she says that her mother was sitting in a chair on 31st
July. The records suggest that she was confined to bed at this stage.
On 1st
August, Mrs Parkin was said to be very poorly. She was given a bed bath and turned. She took a small amount of fluid with great difficulty.
Within the Charnley House diary, there is a loose undated sheet of paper headed
'night report'
, which may well relate to the night of 1st
August as there was insufficient space on the diary page to make the night entry below the evening report. It is recorded there that the tablets were not given to Mrs Parkin, as it was unclear to the carer when she had last taken medication.
The Day of the Death
The morning entry in the Charnley House diary for 2nd
August records that Mrs Parkin was very ill and should not be given any further medication. She was given
'all care'
but died at 1pm. The diary records that Dr Napier came at 2pm to certify the death and that the certificate could be collected by the relatives, from the surgery, the following morning. The undertakers removed the body at 4.30pm.
Mrs Jones went to visit her mother on the day of her death. The visit was not pre-arranged and Mrs Jones cannot remember at what time she arrived. However, on arrival she was told of her mother's death. She formed the impression that her mother had died only minutes before. She went into her mother's room and saw her lying in bed. She looked very peaceful. At some point, a member of staff told her that the doctor had seen Mrs Parkin before she died. However, Mrs Jones thinks that this meant that a doctor had seen her mother a day or so before the death rather than on the day of the death.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD counterfoil. He certified that the cause of death was old age. He stated that he had last seen Mrs Parkin alive on 31st
July 1984. Mrs Parkin's name appears in Shipman's visits book for 31st
July and the visit is recorded in the Charnley House diary. Her name does not appear in his visits book for 2nd
August, the day of the death. Nor is his attendance at the home recorded in the Charnley House diary for that day. It is recorded on the counterfoil that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that Shipman had seen the body after death. The counterfoil is dated 3rd
August 1984.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Parkin died a natural death. Her gradual deterioration is clearly recorded in the Charnley House daily diary. She had been confined to bed for some time and her death was neither sudden nor unexpected to the staff.
There is no evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Parkin on the day of her death. He visited her on 31st
July and prescribed Temgesic, an opioid analgesic, to relieve her pain. He seems to have recognised that she was close to death. There is no evidence that Mrs Parkin was unconscious after Shipman's visit, so there is no reason to suspect that he might have given her an excessive amount of sedation. There is no reason to suspect that Shipman did anything to hasten Mrs Parkin's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001