The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Frances Potts
Introduction
Mrs Frances Potts died at The Sycamores, a residential home for the elderly, Victoria Street, Hyde on Monday, 22nd
April 1996 at the age of 85. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and she followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Sharon Fruhwirth, Mrs Marjorie Bradbury, Mrs Marian Rowbotham, Mrs Ellen Ashton, Mrs Patricia O'Connell, Mrs Ethel Clayton, Mrs Jean Marie Lohan, Mrs Pamela Jean Ogden and Mrs Joan Williams, all of whom were employed at The Sycamores. The Inquiry has also been in contact with Mrs Potts' daughter, Mrs Shirley Bevan, and has had access to Mrs Potts' general practitioner records, and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period, as well as to the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Potts' medical records reveal that she had a history of angina and ischaemic heart disease and that she suffered from atrial fibrillation and Parkinson's disease. She had strokes in 1988, 1990 and 1994. In 1995, she was said to have had transient ischaemic attacks and two more strokes. She used a wheelchair. Towards the end of her life she was very confused.
The staff also say that Mrs Potts' health deteriorated during the last few weeks of her life. From the medical records it would appear that the deterioration probably stemmed from yet another stroke, which is mentioned on 11th
April 1996. The practice visits book records Mrs Potts' name on 11th
, 15th
, 16th
, 18th
and 19th
April. Not all those visits are mentioned in the medical records, which show entries for 11th
, 16th
and 19th
April. On 16th
April, Shipman appears to have decided to let nature take its course. On 19th
April, the record suggests that Mrs Potts was awake and it was suggested that she should try some food the following day. She was to be allowed up but her pressure areas were to be watched for bedsores. The impression I have is that Mrs Potts had been very ill but was thought to be slightly improved.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Bevan has told the Inquiry that she was with her mother when she died on Monday, 22nd
April 1996. She says that Shipman was not present. The evidence of Mrs Clayton confirms that Mrs Bevan was present at the death. She says that other relatives were also at the home. Mrs Clayton was not surprised at the death; it was expected. She did not call a doctor and does not recall Shipman being at the home around the time of the death. Mrs Bevan asserts that her mother was never left alone with Shipman and she has no suspicion that he might have caused or hastened her death.
Shipman's visits book for 22nd
April contains an entry in Mrs Potts' name. It seems likely that Shipman had intended to visit Mrs Potts on that day. He had not seen her since the previous Friday. However, the only entry in the medical record says:
'O/E - dead
old age hypertension'
.
This suggests that Shipman did not see Mrs Potts alive on the day of her death but was called out to certify the death. As it appears likely that Mrs Potts died at about 11am, Shipman had probably not yet left the surgery at the time of her death. He usually set off on his rounds between 11.30am and noon.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD, stating that he had last seen Mrs Potts alive on 20th
April 1996, two days before her death. He certified that the cause of death was old age and that hypertension, from which he said Mrs Potts had suffered for over ten years, had contributed to the death. He said he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate, where he recorded that the death had occurred at 11am on 22nd
April 1996. He stated that he had attended Mrs Potts during her last illness for a period of two weeks and that he last saw her alive on 20th
April. He recorded that he made a complete external examination of her body within two hours of death and that the mode of death was a coma of 12 to 18 hours in duration. Shipman recorded that his answers as to mode and cause of death were based on statements made by staff at the home and Mrs Potts' sisters. Shipman recorded that Mrs Potts' sisters and son were present at the moment of death. I think this may be an error and that Shipman was not aware that Mrs Potts' daughter had been present.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Potts' death was due to natural causes. It appears that she had had several strokes and her condition had finally deteriorated over a period of at least ten days. When the end came, her death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman saw Mrs Potts during the last two days of her life and no reason to suspect that he did anything which could have caused or hastened her death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001