The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Martha Parkes
Introduction
Mrs Martha Parkes died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Sunday, 28th
May 1972 at the age of 89. It seems likely that she had been admitted a few days earlier. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was senile dementia. At the time of Mrs Parkes’ death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Parkes’ grandson, Mr John Sykes. Mrs Parkes’ hospital records are no longer available. She was buried and so there is no cremation documentation. No post-mortem examination was performed.
This decision was written following consideration of the papers.
Personal Background
Mrs Parkes was a widow who, after the death of her husband, lived for many years with Mr Sykes’ parents. Mr Sykes’ mother was Mrs Parkes’ daughter and the two women were very close. Mrs Parkes enjoyed good health and was quite active. When Mrs Sykes died in 1969, Mrs Parkes was very distressed; she moved to live with another of her daughters. Some time later, she began to suffer the symptoms of dementia. Shortly before her admission to PGI, she had become completely disorientated and confused. She had also become increasingly physically frail and was spending most of the time in bed.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
Mr Sykes cannot remember for how long Mrs Parkes was in hospital before her death. He visited her at least once.
Mr Sykes says that he was one of several visitors who went to see Mrs Parkes on the afternoon of the day of her death, which was a Sunday. His recollection is that she was sitting up in bed and was
‘very perky’
. It came as a surprise when, after they had left the hospital, the family was contacted at about teatime or in the early evening to be told that Mrs Parkes had died. Mr Sykes thinks that the police came round with the news. He remembers that everyone in the family was shocked by the death because Mrs Parkes had previously appeared so well.
Conclusion
Since it was Shipman who certified the cause of Mrs Parkes’ death, it is very likely that he was involved in her treatment following admission. I know from the documentation in the case of Mr Norman Deyes that Shipman was on call on the medical wards that weekend. In the absence of any medical records, it is impossible for me to report on Mrs Parkes’ physical condition or on Shipman’s involvement in her care. Senile dementia used to be acceptable as a certified cause of death but the material before me is insufficient to say whether it was appropriate in Mrs Parkes’ case. As there is no cremation documentation, I know nothing of the circumstances of the death or Shipman’s presence at or near the time of death. Accordingly, I am unable to reach any conclusion about Mrs Parkes’ death.
I very much regret that the Inquiry has had to make these enquiries so many years after the death, and I am sorry for the disturbance this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI, once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001