The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Martha Ann Phelps
Introduction
Mrs Martha Ann Phelps died at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Thursday, 20th
July 1972 at the age of 75. She had been admitted to PGI on the evening of Tuesday, 18th
July. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was left ventricular failure, due to congestive heart failure. Rheumatoid arthritis was said to have contributed to the death. At the time of Mrs Phelps’ death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Phelps’ granddaughters, Mrs Christine Ann Woodall and Mrs Maureen Jones. Mr Thomas William Drew, who was Mrs Phelps’ son, and who was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’), has since died. The Inquiry has had access to some hospital records, but these relate to the condition of Mrs Phelps’ feet and to the treatment she received during 1961 and 1969. They are not relevant to her condition shortly before death. Mrs Phelps was buried. No post-mortem examination was performed.
Mrs Jones and Mrs Woodall say that, at the time, no one in the family was suspicious about the circumstances of Mrs Phelps’ death but that, since learning that Shipman certified the cause of death, they are left with some uncertainty.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mrs Phelps lived with her second husband, Mr Noah Phelps. Both Mrs Woodall and Mrs Jones recall that Mrs Phelps had a problem with her feet and legs. Mrs Woodall recalls that Mrs Phelps used a wheelchair for the last four years of her life. Neither Mrs Jones nor Mrs Woodall remembers hearing that Mrs Phelps suffered from heart trouble or high blood pressure.
About six weeks before Mrs Phelps died, one of her grandchildren died in an accident. The death affected her very badly and Mrs Woodall remembers that she became frail in the weeks before her death.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
Neither Mrs Jones nor Mrs Woodall has any direct knowledge of the circumstances of Mrs Phelps’ admission to PGI. Mrs Woodall was later told by her grandfather that Mrs Phelps had been with friends in a local public house on 18th
July, when she fell ill and was taken to PGI by ambulance.
Neither Mrs Jones nor Mrs Woodall knows anything of Mrs Phelps’ treatment at PGI. Mrs Woodall first became aware that her grandmother had been in PGI when she received a telephone call from the hospital to say that she had died. She believes that her grandfather would probably have been with Mrs Phelps at the time of her death.
Conclusion
In the absence of any medical records relating to Mrs Phelps’ admission to hospital before her death, it is not possible to reach any conclusion about the cause or circumstances of her death. It may well be that the frailty noticed by her granddaughters was a sign that Mrs Phelps was suffering from heart trouble and that she deteriorated suddenly on 18th
July. It is likely that Mrs Phelps was admitted to Ward 1 at PGI and was probably treated by Shipman. I regret to say that I cannot throw any further light on the circumstances of the death. There is no evidence, however, that Shipman played any sinister part in it.
I very much regret that the Inquiry has had to make these enquiries so many years after the death, and I am sorry for the disturbance this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001