The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Mary Ellen Price
Introduction
Mrs Mary Ellen Price died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Thursday, 9th
March 1972 at the age of 73. She had been admitted about a week earlier. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident. At the time of Mrs Price’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Thomas Price (to whom I shall refer as Mr Price), Mrs Price’s eldest son and only surviving child, and from his son, Mr David Michael Price. A statement was also taken from Mrs Kathleen Naylor, who was at the time the senior nursing sister on the ward. Mrs Price’s medical records are no longer available. There was no post-mortem examination. Mrs Price’s body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F.
Although Mr Price and his wife previously had no concerns about Mrs Price’s death, they are now concerned because of information recorded by Shipman on cremation Form B that is inconsistent with their recollection.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mrs Price was widowed about a year or less before her death. She had three adult children. She was a small, slim, energetic woman. She kept her house spotlessly clean and did her own shopping. She did washing and ironing for other people she knew. She enjoyed good health until the time of the event which necessitated her admission to PGI.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
Mrs Price was admitted to PGI about a week before her death. On the day of admission, Mr Price’s sister telephoned him to tell him that their mother had had a slight stroke and had been taken to PGI. Mr Price and his wife visited the following day. They found Mrs Price in
‘a small side room’
, lying in bed, propped up with pillows. Her speech was slow but they could understand her when she spoke. Mr Price had himself suffered a stroke three years previously; he had made a full recovery and he thought his mother’s condition was no worse than his had been. However, evidence received by the Inquiry suggests that patients were put in a side room only if their condition was serious and was giving cause for concern.
Mr Price visited his mother on three or four further occasions. Her condition seemed to improve and, on later visits, she started to ask if she could go home. Mr Price told her that she should have a good rest and get better first. Mr Price recalls that the nurses on the ward did not say anything about Mrs Price’s condition. He remembers that the only contact the family had with nurses was when one would look in and ask if Mrs Price was all right. They never saw or spoke to any doctors, so far as he can recall. Both he and his sister had left telephone numbers at which they could be contacted if the need arose.
Mr Price is fairly certain that he last saw his mother alive on the afternoon of Wednesday, 8th
March, the day before she died. He may be correct about this. Visiting was allowed on Wednesday afternoons and, as a general rule, at any time of the day if the patient was very poorly. His impression was still that she would make a complete recovery. Mrs Price was fully conscious and they discussed Mr Price’s reasons for believing that his mother would benefit from staying in hospital; he wanted her to rest and knew that, as soon as she left hospital, she would resume her active lifestyle. He believes that Mrs Price’s sister (or possibly his sister) probably visited that evening, although he is not sure that she did.
No one in the family was told of any deterioration in Mrs Price’s condition during the course of the week she was in hospital.
The Day of the Death
Mr Price received the news of his mother’s death in a telephone call from his sister at about 4.30pm to 4.45pm on the day of the death. She had been contacted by the hospital earlier that afternoon. No one from Mrs Price’s family was present when she died. The family was shocked to hear of the death, which to them was sudden and unexpected. They assumed that Mrs Price had suffered a second, more severe, stroke. Mr Price does not know if his sister was given any more information about the death. She did not tell him anything more than that; it seems likely that she would have done if she had known of anything more to tell.
Certification
The family decided that Mrs Price’s body should be cremated. Shipman completed cremation Form B. He recorded that the death occurred at
‘1355hr’
. He wrote that he had attended Mrs Price during her last illness for a period of six days, which may well be correct. He said that he had last seen Mrs Price alive on
‘9/3/72’
. He noted that he had seen the body ten minutes after the death and that he had then carried out a
‘complete’
examination of it. He recorded that the cause of death was
‘Cerebrovascular Accident’
. The mode of death, he said, was
‘coma’
of
‘24-36hrs’
duration. He said that this was based on his own observation. This entry is in conflict with Mr Price’s recollection and is one of the reasons why he and his wife are now concerned. Mr Price clearly recalls talking to his mother the day before her death.
On Form B, Shipman recorded that Sister Naylor had nursed Mrs Price during her final illness. He stated that he was present at the moment of death but did not say that anyone else was present. He confirmed that he had no doubt about the cause of death. Sister Naylor has told the Inquiry that she has no recollection of Mrs Price.
Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain completed Form C. He recorded that he had separately seen and questioned Shipman and the nursing staff on Ward 1. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Conclusion
In the absence of any medical records, it is not possible to assess the seriousness of Mrs Price’s condition in the few days following her stroke and admission to hospital. The fact that she was put into a side room or cubicle suggests that she was more seriously ill than Mr Price now recalls. It is possible that Mrs Price’s condition deteriorated gradually during her stay and that she was unconscious for the last 24 to 36 hours of her life. If so, it would seem likely that her death was natural.
However, Mr Price claims to have a clear recollection of speaking to his mother not long before her death, at which time she was coherent and talking about the possibility of returning home. Of course, it might not have been realistic for her to hope that she would return home but the very fact that she was able to talk at all shows that she was not in a coma. It is possible that Mr Price is mistaken and that he did not visit his mother during the last 24 hours of her life. It is easy to make mistakes of recollection about events so long ago. I conclude that it is entirely possible that Mrs Price deteriorated gradually after her stroke and died after a period of unconsciousness of 24 to 36 hours.
That said, there are reasons to suspect that that did not happen. Although it is quite possible for Mr Price’s recollection of the time of his visits to be mistaken, he is, in my view, far less likely to be mistaken when he avers that no one in the family was warned that Mrs Price was in danger of dying. Mrs Price had three adult children and other relations and, in my view, it is most unlikely that not one of them would have attended if they had been warned that her life was in danger or that she had entered a coma. I infer from that that it is likely that Mrs Price’s death was quite sudden. That raises the suspicion that Shipman might have done something to hasten her death. If the death was quite sudden, there is ground for suspicion in that Shipman stated that Mrs Price had been in a coma for 24 to 36 hours. If that was untrue, it was a fabrication designed to give the appearance that the death was expected and consistent with the stated cause. A further ground for suspicion is that Shipman has implied on cremation Form B that he was alone with Mrs Price at the time of her death. For most doctors, it would be quite unusual to be present at the death of a patient and very unusual indeed to be alone with the patient at the death. As I have explained in
Chapter Seven
, however, I am satisfied that there were occasions when Shipman suggested on Form B that he had been present alone at the moment of death of a patient when that was not so.
My conclusion is that I am unable to say whether or not Mrs Price died a natural death. She probably did but there are some grounds to suspect that Shipman might have caused or hastened her end.
I very much regret that I have had to raise these doubts so many years after the death and I am sorry for the distress this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001