The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Marie Quinn
Introduction
Mrs Marie Quinn died on 24th
November 1997 at the age of 67. Following exhumation of her body in September 1998, it was found that she had morphine in the tissues consistent with the administration of a lethal dose.
The Circumstances of the Death
Mrs Quinn was divorced and lived alone. Her only son, Mr John Quinn, worked in Japan; he kept in frequent contact with her. On the morning of the day of her death, Mrs Quinn attended a funeral in Hyde. She appeared to friends to be in normal health. At about 2.30pm, she telephoned her son in Japan for a chat. She said nothing that caused him to be concerned for her health. A close friend, Mrs Ellen Hanratty, who also saw Mrs Quinn regularly, said she seemed in normal health.
Shipman's account of the events of the day was that Mrs Quinn telephoned the surgery at about 5.45pm, asking for a visit as she had noticed some weakness on the left side. Records showed that no telephone call was made from her home to the surgery that day. Shipman claimed he had taken it himself, as he happened to be standing in the reception area, preparing to leave for the day. He claimed that Mrs Quinn told him that she had noticed a weakness down the left side, over the last hour. He told her he would come; she should leave the door on the latch and he would let himself in. Shipman was lying. She did not telephone him and it must have been his own idea to visit Mrs Quinn.
Nobody saw Shipman arrive, so the time of the visit is not known. He claimed that it had taken him about 25 minutes to reach the house, due to rush-hour traffic and he had arrived at about 6.15pm. However, that too was a lie as the computerised records of other patients showed that he was still seeing patients in the surgery at 6.16pm.
In evidence, Shipman claimed that, when he let himself in, he found Mrs Quinn on the kitchen floor, close to death. He examined her and found a slight carotid pulse and some reaction of the pupils to light. She was not breathing but he said that she responded abnormally to the Babinski test. That is a test in which the doctor strokes the underside of the foot. Normally the big toe reacts by going down. If there is cerebral irritation, such as occurs in a stroke, the big toe will go up. Shipman considered that Mrs Quinn was still alive but deeply unconscious. He decided not to attempt resuscitation as he thought she had had a severe stroke and would be irreparably brain damaged if revived. He waited for two minutes. Had she stirred, he would have called an ambulance but she did not. He then checked and found that she was dead. He believed she had had a stroke. In fact he must have given her a dose of morphine and she must have died very quickly as, at 6.32pm, he telephoned Mrs Hanratty, who was named as the contact on Mrs Quinn's records.
Shipman gave an account of what had happened to Mrs Hanratty, Mr Quinn and Mrs Cecilia Adshead, a friend. In essence, he said that Mrs Quinn had telephoned the surgery saying that she seemed to be having a stroke and was paralysed down one side of her body. He told her he would come and she should leave the door on the latch. When he arrived he had found her on the floor, breathing her last, and it had been too late to admit her to hospital. He said she had had a massive stroke.
Shipman signed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), giving the immediate cause as cardiovascular accident of 20 minutes' duration. This was due to arteriosclerosis, which was said to have been present for five years, and hypertension, said to have been present for three years.
The Medical Records
Mrs Quinn's medical records showed that she appeared to suffer from systemic sclerosis, which causes fibrosis of the skin and other tissues. In Mrs Quinn, it affected her oesophagus and the small blood vessels in the fingers and toes. There was a single entry in the summary card dated 1992, suggesting that she suffered from arteriosclerosis, and another, dated 1994, for hypertension. However, there was no other reference to arteriosclerosis and the prosecution suggested that the summary card had been falsified in order to provide some support for Shipman's diagnosis of the causes of death. The evidence of hypertension was not clear from the records. The only high blood pressure reading was 170/100 on a day in October 1997. However, it appears that Mrs Quinn had been taking Nifedipine since 1993. Shipman said that this had been prescribed for hypertension, so it may be that her blood pressure had been well controlled.
There was an entry in the records made on the morning after Mrs Quinn's death, saying:
'rang 1745 weak larm leg visit 1815 dying cert 1820 cva arteriosclerosisi
(
sic
)
hypertension and sclerodema'
.
The Expert Evidence
Post-mortem examination showed that there were no blood clots in the brain. The vessels in the brain stem appeared normal. There was a minimal degree of fatty deposit in the carotid arteries. The cardiovascular and respiratory systems were in good condition. There was no obvious sclerosis. Dr John Rutherford was able to rule out cerebral haemorrhage, as there was no blood clot in the brain. He could not positively rule out occlusion of a blood vessel, as this was difficult to confirm at autopsy. However, an occlusive stroke does not usually cause sudden death but rather paralysis and loss of function on one side after which the patient might recover but, if deterioration continues, death might follow within a period or two to three days. Dr Rutherford expressed the view that the cause of death was morphine toxicity and this diagnosis was not challenged on Shipman's behalf at trial. Nor did he advance any explanation as to how the morphine had come to be in Mrs Quinn's body.
Shipman had given the immediate cause of death as cerebrovascular accident. Dr Rutherford said that neither the pathological findings nor the clinical circumstances fitted that diagnosis. Shipman had given arteriosclerosis and hypertension as underlying causes. Dr Rutherford said there was no evidence of cardiovascular disease. There could have been some hypertension. In other words, Shipman's diagnoses of the causes of death could not be justified on the medical history.
Comment
The evidence in this case is overwhelming, as with all the cases where morphine was found in the body. Even without that evidence the case would have been strong and there are a number of noteworthy features:
This was a sudden death, wholly unexpected to those who knew Mrs Quinn.
The death was closely associated in time with Shipman's presence. He claimed to have found Mrs Quinn on the verge of death. There are a number of other cases where Shipman has claimed to have found a patient already dead or dying, when the truth is that they were alive when he arrived but dead when he left.
Shipman claimed that the patient had telephoned, requesting a visit. This was a proven lie as no call had been made from Mrs Quinn's house to the surgery. Shipman sometimes said this to the families of victims as an excuse for a visit, when the truth was that he had made his own decision to call.
Shipman also claimed that he had told Mrs Quinn to leave the door on the latch. He sometimes said this to families of victims when he needed an explanation for his means of entry, when he was claiming that on arrival he found the patient already dead.
Despite his attempts at falsification, the cause of death given by Shipman was not borne out by examination of the records.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001