The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Dorothea Hill Renwick
Introduction
Mrs Dorothea Hill Renwick died at her home, 148 Dowson Road, Gee Cross, Hyde on Tuesday, 9th
February 1988 at the age of 90. Mrs Renwick had been a widow for five years. She had been a patient of Shipman since July 1981. She disliked him and thought him arrogant. He certified that the cause of her death was cardiac failure, due to ischaemic heart disease caused by hypertension.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions, Mrs Renwick's daughter, Mrs Thea Anne Morgan, contacted the police, expressing concern over the manner of Mrs Renwick's death. The police investigated the death of Mrs Renwick and took a statement from Mrs Morgan. Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Renwick but an inquest into her death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Morgan and Dr Jeffery Osmer Moysey, the practitioner at the Donneybrook Surgery who was the duty doctor on the day of Mrs Renwick's death. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Renwick's general practitioner records and to the duty doctor transfer diary and Shipman's visits book for 1988.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Renwick lived alone but her daughter, Mrs Morgan, lived nearby. Mrs Renwick had apparently suffered three strokes, the most recent about a year before her death. She had high blood pressure, for which she took medication. She had no grip in her left hand but nevertheless insisted on doing some of her own housework. Her daughter cooked for her.
Mrs Morgan was also a patient of Shipman, who at that time practised from the Donneybrook Surgery. Mrs Morgan held him in high regard and appreciated his willingness to call on her mother at home.
The day before her mother's death, Mrs Morgan rang the surgery to say that Mrs Renwick only had a few days' medication left and asked if Shipman could visit. She was told that he would come out the following afternoon. The intended visit was recorded in Shipman's visits book.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of 9th
February 1988, Mrs Morgan visited her mother and found her in good spirits. She had done some dusting. Mrs Morgan prepared her mother's lunch, which included a rice pudding with strawberry jam for dessert. Mrs Renwick was very fond of this dish. When Mrs Morgan left to go to work at about noon, she reminded her mother not to go to sleep, as Shipman was coming. At that time, Mrs Renwick had nearly finished eating her main course. She was very contented and was humming to herself. When Mrs Morgan closed the door, it locked behind her. It could only then be opened from within or by the use of a key.
Between 6pm and 7pm, Mrs Morgan received a telephone call from a family friend, Mr Clifford Potts, who had just been to Mrs Renwick's house and had found it in darkness. Mrs Morgan went straight round. She found the door locked, but only on the Yale lock. She discovered her mother sitting in the dining room, in a chair in which she did not usually sit. It had been her husband's chair and Mrs Renwick discouraged others from using it. Mrs Renwick looked peaceful as if she had fallen asleep. There was a rug arranged neatly over her knees; it was beginning to smoulder as it was so close to the gas fire, which was on a high setting. On the mantelpiece were a bowl of rice pudding and a cup of coffee. Under the cup was a prescription for blood pressure medication. In the kitchen sink were some of the pots from lunch. Mrs Morgan says that her mother enjoyed her food and had a good appetite. She believes that her mother would have finished her lunch had she been able to. She thinks her mother must have died shortly after she left to go to work.
Mrs Morgan called for the duty doctor to attend and Dr Moysey arrived. He confirmed the death but, according to Mrs Morgan, said that because it was a sudden death, the family would have to contact the police before moving the body. Dr Moysey cannot now recall why he said the police must be called but, in the event, they attended and took details of what had happened. After speaking to Mrs Morgan, they said that, because Shipman had visited that day, she would be permitted to have the body removed to the undertakers. Dr Moysey said that the family should see Shipman the next day to collect a certificate.
The Aftermath
The following morning, Mrs Morgan saw Shipman at the surgery. She told him that her mother's death had come as a complete shock. Shipman's response was to suggest that, now that her mother was dead, she would be able to look after herself. Mrs Morgan was surprised at his unsympathetic attitude. He gave her a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). The MCCD is no longer available, but the MCCD counterfoil has survived. It records the cause of death as cardiac failure (alone) and states that Shipman last saw Mrs Renwick alive on the day of her death. The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') shows that Shipman certified that the death was caused by cardiac failure due to ischaemic heart disease, in turn caused by hypertension.
As Mrs Renwick was to be cremated, Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that the death occurred at about 2pm on 9th
February. No one had been present at the moment of death. He had last seen Mrs Renwick alive about two hours before her death. He said that he saw the body about 24 hours after death. The cause of death was as stated on the death certificate. He said that the mode of death was syncope of only seconds' duration. He said he had based his opinions as to the cause and mode of death on the statements made by Dr Moysey and Mrs Morgan. How they could have known what was the cause or mode of death is hard to understand as both only saw the body some time after the death. Professor Richard Baker regarded the cremation forms as moderately suspicious.
At the time of the police investigation following Shipman's convictions in 2000, Mrs Renwick's medical records could not be found. During the Inquiry's investigation, the records were found at the Donneybrook Surgery. Dr Moysey has examined them and confirms that Mrs Renwick had a long history of high blood pressure, quite well controlled by medication. He has also deciphered the entries made at the time of Mrs Renwick's death. The entry for 9th
February, as interpreted by Dr Moysey, was:
'Complaining of odd chest pain. Possibly due to cold or Angina. The pain lasted for about half an hour. Her blood pressure was 140/90. Both 1st and 2nd heart sounds were present. She had a trace of Oedema. She had no obvious crepitations. Her jugular venous pressure was just raised. Dr Shipman was to continue prescribing Aldomet and Adalat. Dr Shipman thought that she was a very frail old lady and that he should see her again in 3 months' time'
.
As Dr Moysey observed, the general picture was satisfactory and there were no immediate signs that Mrs Renwick's heart would fail. The blood pressure reading was satisfactory.
Mrs Morgan now recalls the police showing her an extract from her mother's medical records but I am satisfied that her recollection is at fault in this regard.
Conclusion
Mrs Renwick was alive when Shipman arrived for the visit. I think it likely that he arrived while she was still eating her lunch, soon after Mrs Morgan left. On Form B, he estimates the time of his visit at about noon. I think that would be about right. From the entry he made at some stage in the medical records, Shipman would have us think that he examined Mrs Renwick, gave her a prescription and left her alive and well. Had he done so, I think it likely she would have either finished her lunch or at least taken the dishes to the kitchen and washed them up. Shipman suggests that Mrs Renwick died at about 2pm, although how he is supposed to know that is hard to understand, if he was not there. On the evidence, I infer that Shipman arrived at about noon and that Mrs Renwick was never able to finish her pudding. So this was a very sudden death which took place extremely close to the time of a visit by Shipman. When Mrs Morgan left the house, her mother was in good health, relaxed and eating a healthy lunch. It is too much of a coincidence to accept that Mrs Renwick could have died a natural death so soon after Shipman's departure that she had not had time to finish her pudding. It is far more likely that Shipman administered an injection to Mrs Renwick and that she lapsed into sleep, unconsciousness and died while he was there. In my view, the medical note is a fabrication, designed to suggest that Mrs Renwick was alive and well when Shipman left.
The gas fire, which had been left on a high setting, is also a cause for suspicion. This is a feature of a number of suspicious deaths in which Shipman had left the body to be found by others. Leaving the body wrapped up and in a warm room would make the task of estimating the time of death even more difficult than usual.
The contents of Form B, in particular the claim that the information about the cause and mode of death had come from Dr Moysey and Mrs Morgan, are plainly false and are designed to create a feasible account and to allay any possible suspicion.
It appears that Shipman was prepared to run the risk that, if the body was not found during surgery hours, the duty doctor called to the death might refer the case to the coroner. However, one of the Donneybrook doctors or a deputising doctor would have been on call that night and that doctor would have left the matter of certification to Shipman, as the patient's regular doctor. In any event, a routine post-mortem examination would not reveal the presence of morphine and Shipman might well have believed that the death was likely to be ascribed to heart disease. This indicates a degree of confidence on Shipman's part that the normal course of events following the death would not raise suspicions.
I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Renwick.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001