The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Anne Lilian Ralphs
Introduction
Mrs Anne Lilian Ralphs died at her home, 25 Baron Road, Gee Cross, Hyde on Friday, 20th
September 1996 at the age of 75. She was a widow and lived alone in a warden controlled flat. She had been a patient of Shipman since 1984 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
In October 2001, Mrs Ralphs' daughter-in-law, Mrs Joan Ralphs, contacted the police to express concern about her mother-in-law's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Joan Ralphs and a locum doctor at the Market Street practice, Dr Paul Andrew Lomas.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Ralphs but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Joan Ralphs who gave oral evidence at a hearing on 19th
July 2001. Statements have also been provided by Mrs Ralphs' son, Mr Alan Ralphs, her daughter, Mrs Beryl Ann Davis, and an on call duty doctor for Healthcall (an out of hours duty doctor service), Dr M A M Choudhury. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Ralphs' general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville, who gave oral evidence on 23rd
July 2001.
Personal Background
In 1979, Mrs Ralphs had been diagnosed as having a hiatus hernia. This gave her intermittent trouble for the rest of her life and she took various medications for it. She had periodic episodes of haematemesis (coughing of blood). Her gall bladder was removed in 1992 and she subsequently developed a small incisional hernia in the wound, which caused her intermittent discomfort. She also suffered from osteoarthritis of the neck, for which she took analgesics. In 1995, following investigations in hospital, she was said to be suffering from diverticular disease, although this was not serious. At the beginning of 1996, she was diagnosed as suffering from high blood pressure, which proved difficult to treat, and her blood pressure remained elevated to differing degrees until the time of her death. From time to time she suffered from episodes of depression.
Mrs Ralphs saw her son and daughter frequently. Her daughter-in-law, Mrs Joan Ralphs, would often take her own mother, Mrs Lily Higgins, to see her mother-in-law and the three women would go to the shops or stay in for a chat. According to her family, Mrs Ralphs was quite mobile, although she had troublesome pains in her back and neck and became tired after walking long distances. She still did her own housework, apart from cleaning the bathroom, which her daughter-in-law did for her.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
On the evening of Wednesday, 18th
September 1996, Mrs Ralphs telephoned her daughter-in-law to say that she was unwell and her head felt 'like a washing machine'. Mr and Mrs Alan Ralphs went to her house where they found her in her nightclothes. She had been lying down on the bed. They summoned a doctor and Dr Choudhury attended. He noted her complaints of dizziness and sickness. She said she had no pain, no headache and was not breathless. He diagnosed dizziness and hypertension. He prescribed Stemetil for dizziness and bendrofluazide for the hypertension. He recommended that Mrs Ralphs should see her own doctor the following day. When he had left, Mr and Mrs Alan Ralphs settled Mrs Ralphs down, made certain that she had access to her emergency call system and a telephone, and left her for the night.
The following day, Thursday 19th
September, Shipman was not in his surgery. Dr Lomas was on duty. He visited Mrs Ralphs and his note reads:
'1/7
(
1 day
)
Hx
(
history
)
of one episode of vertigo
7pm last night lasted a few mins
fell/vomited x 1 o headache
preceding “flu” feeling 2/7
(
2 days
)
and now
dry cough. Now unsteady / no more vertigo
O/E amblyopia
(
blurred vision
)
® eye (longstanding)
PNS
carotids
CNS
ENT
Chest
BP 180/108 x 2 CVS
IMP
(
Impression
)
? viral labyrinthitis ??? vascular
recent
(
increase
)
in ACE dose
Rx stemetil 5mg Ttds (30) / bed rest
Rev1-2/7 Dr S'
.
Dr Lomas explained his note to the police. He explained that he noted the consultation of the previous evening. When he saw her, Mrs Ralphs was still feeling unsteady but had had no further episode of vertigo. On examination he found she had longstanding blurred vision in her right eye and her blood pressure was raised. He measured it twice. All other examinations were normal. He concluded that she had probably been suffering from viral labyrinthitis, a virus affecting the inner ear, although he could not exclude the possibility that she had had a slight stroke. He prescribed Stemetil and advised Mrs Ralphs to rest in bed. On returning to the surgery, he requested a visit from Shipman within the next day or two.
The Day of the Death
On Friday, 20th
September, Mrs Joan Ralphs collected her mother, Mrs Higgins, from her home and the two women went to Mrs Ralphs' house, arriving at about 11.30am. Mrs Ralphs was sitting on the edge of her bed, waiting for Shipman to come. She had no complaints about her health. She was expecting her great-granddaughter Leanne for tea and asked her daughter-in-law to buy two pies and two cakes. That would be one pie and one cake each. Mrs Joan Ralphs and Mrs Higgins left Mrs Ralphs at about noon. Mrs Joan Ralphs closed the door behind her, thereby securing it on its Yale lock.
Mrs Joan Ralphs returned to her mother-in-law's home at about 1pm, having done her shopping and having dropped her mother off at her home. When she arrived, she saw Shipman's car parked outside. She opened the door at ground floor level using her key and looked up the steps leading to the flat. Shipman came to the top of the steps and said words to the effect: 'Thank goodness it's you'. Mrs Joan Ralphs went upstairs and into her mother-in-law's bedroom. Her mother-in-law was lying across the bed with both feet on the floor. She was still in her nightclothes. Mrs Joan Ralphs had the impression that her mother-in-law was dead. Shipman leaned over Mrs Ralphs, pushed his fingers down her throat and moved them up and down. Mrs Joan Ralphs, who has no medical knowledge or experience, thought he was trying to clear the airway. Shipman did not suggest calling an ambulance or attempt any other form of resuscitation. Nor did he carry out any examination. Mrs Joan Ralphs did not see any equipment such as a stethoscope. She realised that her mother-in-law was indeed dead and went to telephone her husband from the living room.
While waiting for her husband to arrive, Mrs Joan Ralphs offered Shipman a drink. He asked for water and, when given the glass, balanced it on top of a black case which he held on his knees. In due course Mr Ralphs came to the flat and a while later their son Darren also arrived. Mr Ralphs had the impression that his mother appeared to have fallen backwards from a seated position on the side of the bed. She looked completely peaceful. No one recalls Shipman saying anything about the cause of death or about referring the matter for a post-mortem examination or to the coroner.
Later, Shipman made a note in the records as follows:
'190/110 HS I II JVP°
wheezy rhonchi
Reflexes(L)
(R)
leg
(
Illegible word
)
grip poor
CVA
Ref TGH
(
this has been crossed out in a different pen
)
(
then continuing in the different pen
)
Daughter in law present
Non-responsive
pupils dilated
Patient died 1325 hrs
CVA
Hypertension'
.
I interpret this to mean that, on arrival, Shipman had found Mrs Ralphs alive. He had taken her blood pressure, which was 190/110, which is high. He had listened to the heart sounds, which were normal. He had found no sign of raised jugular venous pressure. He heard wheezy rhonchi, or sounds, in the chest. He appears to have found a reduced reflex on the left side and an increased reflex on the right, although it is not clear which reflexes he claims to have tested. These abnormal reflexes would, if genuinely observed, be indicative of a possible stroke. Shipman thought that grip was poor, although he does not say whether in one hand or both. He diagnosed a cerebrovascular accident. He decided to refer the patient to Tameside General Hospital, but later crossed this reference out, ostensibly after he had decided that the patient had died. He then noted that Mrs Joan Ralphs had arrived. The patient was not responsive to stimuli and the pupils were seen to be fixed. Death occurred at 1.25pm. The cause of death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
It should be noted that Shipman's note does not say how Mrs Ralphs changed from being conscious and upright (which, by implication, she was when he arrived) to being unconscious and unresponsive on her back. The note reads as though the transition was instantaneous and occurred at the moment of Mrs Joan Ralphs' arrival. Shipman does not describe any treatment given either before or after the collapse.
Certification
On the same day, Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). He gave the cause of death as cerebrovascular accident, which had begun 20 minutes before death and which was due to hypertension. He stated that the hypertension had been present for 18 months. Shipman said that he had last seen Mrs Ralphs alive on 12th
September. The computerised records also suggest that he had seen her on that day.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He gave the date of death wrongly as 12th
September, and this appears to have been amended by the medical referee, Dr Hinchliffe. Shipman stated that he attended the deceased for 30 minutes during her last illness and that he last saw her alive on 12th
September 1996 and just before death. He said that he saw Mrs Ralphs' body immediately after death and made a complete external examination. The mode of death is given as collapse lasting 30 to 40 minutes, the observations being his own and those of the daughter-in-law who is also said to have been present at the moment of death.
Mrs Joan Ralphs made the point that she had only been away from her mother-in-law's house for about an hour, during which Shipman claims that Mrs Ralphs was in a state of collapse before death for 30 or 40 minutes. If that were so, Shipman must have arrived and Mrs Ralphs must have collapsed very soon after her departure. I note that the medical record gives no impression of the passage of 30 to 40 minutes. Mrs Joan Ralphs said that she had the distinct impression that her mother-in-law was already dead when she walked into the bedroom. In Form B, Shipman says that she was present at the moment of death. In the medical records, he implies that Mrs Joan Ralphs was there at the time of the collapse. In my view, the Form B entries are probably inaccurate and are designed to give the misleading impression that the process of death took 30 to 40 minutes, during which time Mrs Joan Ralphs was present.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville observed that the signs observed by the locum doctor might possibly have been indicative of a slight stroke in the cerebellum, the part of the brain affecting balance. When Shipman visited the following day, his note suggests symptoms consistent with a cortical stroke, which is a stroke in a different part of the brain from the type previously suggested. The occurrence of two strokes affecting different parts of the brain in such a short time would, as Dr Grenville pointed out, be inherently unlikely. Moreover, the only type of cerebrovascular accident, which would have produced very sudden death, would be a brain stem stroke. This would involve a third type of stroke. If the medical records are to make sense and are to be consistent with a sudden death by stroke, it would have to be accepted that Mrs Ralphs had had signs of three strokes in different parts of the brain within a time span of about 48 hours. I cannot accept that that could have happened.
If Mrs Ralphs had suffered a stroke in Shipman's presence, even a brain stem stroke, there would have been a period in which he could and should have called an ambulance. If she appeared to have stopped breathing, he could and should have attempted to resuscitate her. To do this he would have had to lay her on a flat, firm surface and her clothing would have been disturbed. It is clear that he did neither of those things. If Mrs Ralphs had collapsed but was still breathing, Shipman could and should have put her into the recovery position. He did not do so. His actions in putting his fingers down her throat would have had no effect unless done immediately after she had collapsed, when it would have been sensible to check that the airway was open. It appears to me that he probably put his fingers down her throat for show. In summary, Shipman did not behave as any reasonable doctor would have behaved in the presence of a patient who had collapsed and who was suspected of having a stroke.
Professor Richard Baker found the death highly suspicious on account of the contents of both the medical records and the cremation forms.
Conclusion
This death occurred in Shipman's presence. That is a highly suspicious circumstance.
At about noon, Mrs Ralphs was alive and feeling well enough to contemplate eating tea with her great-granddaughter. If Mrs Joan Ralphs' evidence about the lock on the door is right, Mrs Ralphs must have gone down the steps to let Shipman in. I say if that evidence is right, because in his Inquiry statement Mr Ralphs asserted that his mother had left the door open for Shipman. What made him think that is not clear. Mrs Joan Ralphs was the last person to leave the flat before Shipman arrived and she says the door was locked when she left. So I find that Mrs Ralphs came downstairs to let Shipman in. A short time later she was dead. For other doctors, this kind of sudden death in their presence hardly ever happens. For Shipman it happened frequently, if he is to be believed. That Mrs Ralphs should die a sudden natural death just after Shipman's arrival is quite incredible. It is too much of a coincidence. In my view, the only plausible explanation is that, on finding her alone, Shipman killed Mrs Ralphs by injecting her with opiate, probably diamorphine. She must then have fallen asleep and fallen backwards across the bed. Her peaceful appearance in death was consistent with death due to an overdose of opiate.
I have already said that Shipman's account of his consultation with Mrs Ralphs does not make good medical sense. Moreover, it appears to me that the entries in Form B were designed to allay suspicion and to provide a plausible explanation for the death, if one were called for.
I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Ralphs.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001