The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Elizabeth Ann Rogers
Introduction
Mrs Elizabeth Ann Rogers died at her home, 132 Chartist House, Mount Street, Hyde on Wednesday, 30th
December 1987 at the age of 74. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
In about March 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's conviction, Mrs Rogers' granddaughter expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her death. The police investigated the death and took a witness statement from Mrs Marlene O'Neill, who is Mrs Rogers' daughter.
An inquest into Mrs Rogers' death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken witness statements from Mrs O'Neill and from the warden at Chartist House, Mrs Jennifer Ann Unsworth. It should be pointed out, however, that neither Mrs Rogers herself, nor her accommodation, which was on the 13th
floor, was under warden control.
Mrs O'Neill gave oral evidence at a hearing on 19th
October 2001 and Mrs Unsworth gave evidence on 24th
October 2001. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Rogers' general practitioner records.
Personal Background
Mrs O'Neill describes her mother as an active and independent woman. She suffered from angina for about three years before she died and she took tablets for this. She was a keen dancer. If she overdid it she would get tightness in her chest but she would then rest and the feeling would pass. Mrs O'Neill recalls that on two occasions her mother was admitted to hospital, although she could not recall when this was.
Mrs Rogers' medical records confirm the history of angina and treatment with Adalat. They also confirm an admission to hospital with chest pain on 12th
March 1987, and correspondence from Tameside General Hospital discloses a possible pulmonary embolism in April 1987 and confirmation that the previous admission resulted in a diagnosis of myocardial infarction. A chest x-ray suggested congestive cardiac failure. The summary record completed by Shipman makes note of these events. By May 1987, it was recorded that Mrs Rogers had no further chest pains, although she was to continue to attend the anti-coagulation clinic. There is no later relevant entry until the day of the death.
Mrs O'Neill last saw her mother on Christmas Day 1987. Mrs Rogers seemed well and was making arrangements to go out on New Year's Eve. Mrs O'Neill is not sure whether or not she spoke to her mother on the telephone after that.
Mrs Unsworth, the warden, remembers that Mrs Rogers always dressed smartly and appeared to enjoy good health.
The Day of the Death
Shipman's visits book contains an entry indicating an intention to visit Mrs Rogers on 30th
December 1987.
Mrs O'Neill recalls that Shipman telephoned her at about lunchtime on that day. He told her that her mother had died. He said that Mrs Rogers had telephoned him that morning to request a visit because she was not feeling well. He said that she needed to go into hospital, though he did not say why. He said he had left her to go down to seek the warden's assistance in packing her bag for her. When he returned to the flat, Mrs Rogers had died. He asked Mrs O'Neill to come to Chartist House, but told her that she should call in to see the warden before going to her mother's flat.
Mrs Unsworth remembers Shipman coming down to her office and asking her to pack a bag for Mrs Rogers to go to hospital. When she went with Shipman to the flat, they found Mrs Rogers sitting in a chair. She was dead. Her death seemed very sudden and Mrs Unsworth was shocked.
Mrs O'Neill went to Chartist House and called at Mrs Unsworth's office. After a short while, Mrs O'Neill's daughter and son-in-law arrived and together they went to Mrs Rogers' flat. Mrs Unsworth did not accompany them. When they entered the flat, Shipman was no longer there. Mrs Rogers was sitting in her usual armchair with her head slightly bowed. The only unusual thing about her appearance was that she was still in her nightclothes. Mrs O'Neill thinks that this indicates that her mother must have felt ill that morning as she would normally be up and dressed early. She liked to go out each morning to buy a fresh loaf.
Shipman's note for the day reads as follows:
'V
(
visit
)
Pain in shoulders and in chest
BP 120/70
Feels dizzy
Sweating
(
illegible word
)
Pulse regular 100/m'
.
There was no more space on the relevant card, and the entry was continued on the outside of the envelope:
'Died 13.10
C.T.
Warden and self present
after death'
.
I note that Shipman does not claim that he summoned an ambulance or attempted to resuscitate Mrs Rogers, who was only 74 years old and had been living a very active life. There would be no point in so doing if he knew that she had died of a lethal dose of opiate.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). The certificate itself has not survived but the counterfoil shows that Shipman stated that he had last seen Mrs Rogers alive on the day she died. He said that the immediate cause of death was coronary thrombosis but did not specify any underlying cause, even though there was a history of angina and congestive heart failure.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He certified that death had occurred at about 1pm. He said he had attended Mrs Rogers for half an hour during her last illness. He said that the mode of death was syncope lasting minutes. That answer was said to be based on his own observations and those of the warden at Chartist House. He said both he and the warden had been present at the moment of death. Mrs Unsworth says she was not present at the moment of death. Mrs Rogers was already dead when Mrs Unsworth arrived with Shipman. This entry gives rise to suspicion as Shipman frequently sought to suggest that others had been present at the moment of death when in truth they had not. In any event, Shipman's entry on Form B is inconsistent with the entry in the medical records where he said that he and the warden were present after the death, rather than at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered the cremation certificate and then separately the medical records, and concluded that the death of Mrs Rogers was highly suspicious.
Conclusion
There is clear evidence that Mrs Rogers suffered from angina and congestive heart failure and must have been at risk of a sudden death from heart attack. There is also some evidence that she was not well on the day of her death. She had not dressed herself and seems to have telephoned the surgery to request a visit. It is therefore possible that she was suffering from some cardiac symptoms.
Having said that, it seems to me that this death is highly suspicious. The most obvious cause for suspicion is that it occurred during Shipman's visit. As Dr John Grenville has said, it is very rare indeed for a sudden death to occur during a doctor's home visit, unless the patient is terminally ill or has reported symptoms suggesting a life-threatening condition, such as a heart attack. Mrs Rogers was not terminally ill and I think it is most unlikely that she regarded herself as being seriously ill on the day of her death. First, if Mrs Rogers had been worried about her condition that morning, I think she would certainly have telephoned her daughter and might well have spoken to Mrs Unsworth. She did neither. Second, Shipman's visits book gives no indication that his proposed visit to Mrs Rogers was in the nature of an emergency. In general, Shipman used his visits book as a reminder of the names of the patients he was to see that day. Emergency requests were not usually entered.
Common sense would indicate that it must be very rare for a patient to die naturally during a routine visit by a general practitioner, as the visit usually lasts for only about 15 to 30 minutes. However, Shipman's patients often died during a visit and that feature gives rise to a high degree of suspicion.
There are other reasons for being suspicious about Shipman's role in this death. His account of the visit does not make sense. Shipman's note records signs and symptoms that are consistent with Mrs Rogers having a heart attack. If she were having a heart attack, one would expect Shipman to telephone immediately for an ambulance. He did not do so. According to Form B, he was with Mrs Rogers for half an hour during her last illness. I am bound to wonder what Shipman was doing for half an hour if he thought that Mrs Rogers was having a heart attack and ought to be admitted to hospital. Why did he not call for an ambulance? If he thought that her condition was not immediately life-threatening, why did he feel able to certify the cause of death without referral to the coroner? Why, if he needed the assistance of Mrs Unsworth, did he not telephone her rather than leave the patient and go down 13 floors to fetch her? Mrs Unsworth suggested that Shipman might not have known her telephone number. I think that is very unlikely. Shipman had many patients at Chartist House and Mrs Unsworth was in charge of some of them. Assuming that Mrs Rogers was alive when Shipman went downstairs, she could only recently have suffered a cardiac arrest when he returned. One would expect him then to commence resuscitation procedures, enlisting Mrs Unsworth's help, and to call for an ambulance. Instead he seems to have accepted that Mrs Rogers was beyond revival.
Form B also gives rise to suspicion. Shipman said that Mrs Unsworth was present at the moment of death and implied that she had contributed some information from which he had been able to diagnose the cause of death and describe the manner of its happening. I am quite sure that Mrs Unsworth was not present at the death and had no information to contribute. I note the inconsistency between the medical record and Form B on the issue of Mrs Unsworth's presence at the death.
Mrs Rogers' position and appearance in death were not consistent with death from coronary thrombosis. Dr Grenville has said that patients who begin to suffer the severe crushing pain which normally accompanies a heart attack usually try to get up to call help. They are not usually found sitting peacefully in a chair. On the other hand, Mrs Rogers' appearance was wholly consistent with that of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by a lethal injection of opiate.
I have come to the sure conclusion that Shipman must have killed Mrs Rogers by giving her a lethal injection. I think he then went downstairs and asked Mrs Unsworth to come upstairs with him under the pretence that he needed her help in packing a bag for Mrs Rogers to go to hospital.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001