The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The First Report
>
Alphabetical List of Cases
>
Lavinia Robinson
Introduction
Mrs Lavinia Robinson died at her home, 46 Chartist House, Mount Street, Hyde on Tuesday, 16th
February 1988 at the age of 84. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
On 5th
November 1999, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, one of Mrs Robinson's sons, Mr Joseph Albert Henshall, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of his mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Albert Henshall and his brother, Mr James Henshall.
An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Albert Henshall, Mr James Henshall, Mr Jack Henshall (Mrs Robinson's third son), Mrs Jennifer Unsworth (the warden at Chartist House) and Mrs Annice Sutton (a retired home help). The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Robinson's general practitioner records, Shipman's visits book for 1988, the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book and documents from Chartist House.
All three of Mrs Robinson's sons gave evidence at a hearing on 19th
October 2001 and Mrs Unsworth gave evidence on 24th
October 2001.
Personal Background
Mrs Robinson was a widow and lived alone. She was a very sociable woman and was generally regarded as being fit, active and healthy. She would, on occasion, assist with the various activities and functions which Mrs Unsworth used to organise at Chartist House. Mrs Robinson had the assistance of a home help, who would sometimes run errands for her. Her flat was in the section of Chartist House under the control of Mrs Unsworth. In the flat was an alarm, which could be used to summon assistance in an emergency.
Mrs Robinson's sons remember that she had never been seriously ill and said that she was mobile and independent. So far as they were concerned, she did not have any heart problems. They did not know that she took any regular medication. They did not notice that she ever had swollen ankles.
There are, however, references in the medical records to suggest that she had congestive heart failure (CHF). On the summary card, there is an entry that says simply
'1978 CHF'
. In the notes themselves, the references to CHF begin in that year. There is a clear description of signs and symptoms from which a diagnosis of CHF could properly be made. Mrs Robinson was prescribed Lanoxin and Moduretic and continued to take these drugs, or replacements for them, fairly consistently over the next nine years. By November 1986, Mrs Robinson was taking Lasix, a strong diuretic, for her CHF. In August 1987, Mrs Robinson was prescribed Serc for vertigo and Aldactide for oedema. Then a month later, on 22nd
September 1987, it appears that there had been some improvement in her condition, as the note says,
'No CHF off Lasix/diuretic vertigo settling'
. More Serc was prescribed for vertigo and nitrazepam, which is a sleeping tablet. It appears that Mrs Robinson's symptoms must have recurred and, on 20th
October 1987, Shipman again prescribed Lanoxin and Moduretic. He said that there was a long-term problem. I infer that he meant that there had been a recurrence of CHF, although he has not recorded what signs or symptoms were present on that occasion. Mrs Robinson also complained of vertigo again. Three weeks later, there was a consultation but no apparent reference to heart failure. There was then no record of any consultation until 9th
February, a week before Mrs Robinson's death.
The Week before the Death
Shipman's visits book contains Mrs Robinson's name on Tuesday, 9th
February 1988. The entry in the medical records says:
'had cold - CHF
ankle oedema
JVP
creps base
LASIX 80mgs am 40 mgs
(
illegible but probably meaning in the afternoon
)
LANOXIN
(
at an increased dosage
)
See Fri'
.
I infer from this note that Mrs Robinson had had a cold and a recurrence of her CHF. She had ankle oedema, raised jugular venous pressure and basal crepitations, all of which are signs of CHF. Shipman does not appear to have listened to Mrs Robinson's heart sounds or to have taken her pulse or blood pressure.
On Friday, 12th
February, Shipman visited again, as promised, and his note records:
'Feels better. Lasix
(
dose illegible
)
only
see Tues'
.
Mr James Henshall recalls that, shortly before her death, his mother had what he called 'a bout of the flu'. When he saw her on Sunday, 14th
February, she seemed to have almost recovered. She had been staying in during the week but she went to his house for Sunday lunch as usual. She did not mention that she was taking any tablets. Moreover, when Mr Albert Henshall cleared his mother's belongings from her flat after her death, the only tablets he found were Distalgesic tablets, which were then available without prescription. Mr James Henshall did not notice swollen ankles and Mrs Robinson did not mention to him that she had seen the doctor. However, I have the impression that Mrs Robinson did not always tell her sons when she had seen Shipman. Mr Albert Henshall said that she did not like to worry them. As Shipman's visits book contains entries for both 9th
and 12th
February, it seems likely that he did in fact visit Mrs Robinson on those days.
Mr Jack Henshall and Mr Albert Henshall visited Mrs Robinson on the evening of Monday, 15th
February. Mr Jack Henshall says that she had had a chill and had stayed in for a few days but was looking forward to going out the following afternoon. Mr Albert Henshall recalls that his mother was still troubled by her cough and when they advised her to call Shipman she agreed to do so. She seemed otherwise her normal good spirited self and no one was concerned.
The Day of the Death
Mr James Henshall visited his mother at about 1.45pm to 2pm on Tuesday, 16th
February 1988. He thought she had already had her lunch and washed up. She made them both a cup of tea and when they had drunk it she washed the pots and put them away. He thought that she mentioned that she was expecting the doctor and was hoping that he would say that she could resume her normal activities. To Mr James Henshall she seemed well. He was not worried about her. Had he been concerned he would have either stayed with her or alerted Mrs Unsworth. He left at about 2.15pm to 2.30pm. When Mr James Henshall arrived at work at about 3pm, there was a message from his son, who had tried to contact him to tell him that his mother had died.
By that time, Mr Albert Henshall had received a telephone call from Mrs Unsworth to say that Mrs Robinson was unwell. Mrs Unsworth asked Mr Albert Henshall to call in at her flat before going up to his mother's flat. He went there straight away and immediately learned that his mother had died. When he asked what had happened, Mrs Unsworth said that Mrs Robinson had asked her home help, or possibly a neighbour, to buy her some ham because she was unable to go out as the doctor was coming. The doctor had come and had been with her when she died. There was nothing that could have been done. Mrs Unsworth has no recollection of this death nor of telling Mrs Robinson's sons about it. However, she agrees that, if she had to break sad news of this kind to a relative, she would not tell them of the death over the telephone but ask them to come to Chartist House and to see her before going up to the flat. She remembers Mrs Robinson well, as a resident who lived at Chartist House for some years and who helped her with social events. She recalls that she was a very active woman.
Mrs Sutton was the home help to Mrs Robinson's sister, Mrs Betty Kirby, who also lived in Chartist House. She says that all the home helps working at Chartist House would finish work at 1pm. Thus, in her view, it must have been a neighbour rather than a home help who went to fetch Mrs Robinson's ham.
Mr Albert Henshall went to his mother's flat and entered using a key supplied by Mrs Unsworth. He saw his mother, fully clothed, lying on her back on the floor next to the settee. Her hands were folded neatly across her lap. She looked very peaceful and when he touched her she was still warm. She looked as if she had just fallen asleep.
The medical records confirm that Shipman saw Mrs Robinson that day. The entry reads as follows:
'16/2/88
c/o chest pain on off BP 100/70
gallop rhythm pulse 70/min oedema
feet JVP
still
(
JVP = jugular venous pressure
)
- 999 collapsed
mtm.
(
mouth to mouth
)
ecm.
(
external cardiac massage
)
HH
neighbour
present
patient
not
resuscitated
certified dead 1500 hrs
cardiac arrest
cardiac failure'
.
I interpret this note to suggest that, when Shipman arrived, Mrs Robinson told him she had been suffering from chest pain on and off. He found her blood pressure was 100/70, which is on the low side and could indicate that she had had a heart attack. He observed swollen feet. He found that the jugular venous pressure was still raised. Mrs Robinson is supposed to have then collapsed and Shipman is supposed to have dialled 999. He says that he gave mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and external cardiac massage. A home help and neighbour were said to be present. The Inquiry has not been able to identify who, if anyone, Shipman was here referring to. The patient was not revived and Mrs Robinson was certified dead at 3pm. The causes of death were cardiac arrest and cardiac failure.
The Aftermath
Mr Jack Henshall attended the next day and noticed that his mother's slippers were by the front door, which is where she would leave them when she was about to go out. This suggested to him that she was just about to go out when she died.
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate itself is not available, the counterfoil has been found. Shipman dated this 16th
February. He said that Mrs Robinson had died on that day and that he had also seen her alive on that day. He had also seen the body after death and he stated that there would not be a post-mortem examination. The cause of her death was said to be coronary thrombosis, and cardiac failure was described as a contributory cause, rather than the underlying condition that had led to the coronary thrombosis.
Mrs Robinson was buried in Stockport Cemetery so there are no cremation documents.
Conclusion
There is one highly suspicious factor relating to this death. It is that the death occurred in Shipman's presence. There can be no doubt of that, as Shipman admitted as much in the medical records and on the MCCD. As Dr John Grenville has said and, as common sense and experience would suggest, it is most unusual for a sudden death to occur in the presence of a general practitioner. The chances of a sudden death occurring within the ten to fifteen minutes that a visit would usually last must be very small indeed. However, patients often died in Shipman's presence and when this occurs it gives rise to a very high degree of suspicion.
Shipman's explanation for this death would be that Mrs Robinson was suffering from CHF and was therefore at a high risk of sudden death from heart attack. Her death from heart attack was not unexpected. Her sons say that they were quite unaware that their mother had had any symptoms of heart failure or had been on any treatment for it. However, as Mr Albert Henshall said, his mother did not like to bother her sons with details of her health and I think it likely that she kept such matters to herself. It appears to me that Mrs Robinson did have recurring episodes of CHF and was therefore at some increased risk of heart attack.
On the face of it, there is evidence in the records of a quite severe episode of CHF in the week before the death. If Mrs Robinson really had had a severe episode of CHF that week, the risk of her having a heart attack would be raised. However, the evidence that she had that episode is limited to the medical records and is not supported by the witness evidence. I must consider the possibility that Shipman fabricated those records. It is known that Shipman often did fabricate records after killing a patient. There are some signs that these records could have been fabricated. When Shipman visited Mrs Robinson on 9th
February, he recorded that she had a cold, which her sons accept as accurate. The note then went on to deal exclusively with signs of CHF. Shipman did not record any symptoms of a cold or cough. That is slightly strange, as is the fact that he did not record as thorough an examination as one would expect if he were concerned about CHF. There is no record of pulse rate or blood pressure or heart sounds. On the Friday, Shipman visited again but the note is extremely brief. It records only that Mrs Robinson felt better. There is no record of any examination at all.
I accept the evidence of Mr James Henshall that, when he saw his mother in the early afternoon of 16th
February, he had no immediate cause for concern about her health. I am less certain of the accuracy of the sons' recollections about her state of health in the week before her death. It may be that Mrs Robinson did not tell her sons everything about her health. It is possible that their recollections have faded over the years. Having said that, if she was in quite severe heart failure, it is strange that none of them had an inkling of it.
The crucial point is that, when one compares Mr James Henshall's account of his mother at 2pm (which I accept as accurate) with the account suggested by Shipman about 45 minutes later, I am driven to conclude that Shipman's account for that day must be false. I cannot believe that if Mrs Robinson had been suffering from chest pain on and off, as Shipman recorded, her son would have been wholly unaware of it when he visited at 2pm. If Shipman made a false record on that day, he might well have made a false record for the previous days. I conclude that there are sensible grounds to suspect that all three entries for the week of the death might have been fabricated.
The record for the day of the death is typical of many I have seen in cases where Shipman has killed a patient. Here, he records a complaint of chest pain, which might indicate angina. He finds signs of heart failure. Then suddenly, while he is with her, Mrs Robinson collapses. That Mrs Robinson should appear well at 2pm and go into cardiac arrest shortly afterwards, at the very moment Shipman was with her, is just too much of a coincidence. It is beyond belief. I suspect that Shipman's claim that he made a 999 call is false. There is no evidence that an ambulance attended. It is possible that Shipman did indeed attempt resuscitation as he claimed in his note. However, there is no independent confirmation that he did. If the patient were dead as the result of a lethal injection of opiate, there would be no point in calling an ambulance or attempting resuscitation. I am suspicious also of Shipman's claim that a home help and neighbour were present at the death. It is possible that they were, but Shipman often claimed that people were present when they were not and when the truth was that he was alone with the patient throughout the process of dying. In my view, the record describing the death does not ring true.
Taking these factors together, I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Robinson when he visited her in the early afternoon of 16th
February. There is no reason to think that he used any other method than his usual one, a lethal injection of strong opiate.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001