The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Betty Royston
Introduction
Mrs Betty Royston died at her home, 37 Ogden Court, Hyde at the age of 70. She was found dead on Wednesday, 5th
February 1997, although it seems likely that she died on the previous day. The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') gives the date of death as Tuesday, 4th
February 1997. Mrs Royston had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
In August 1998, following the publicity surrounding the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mrs Royston's son, Mr Alan Royston, contacted the police to express concern over the circumstances of his mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Royston and Mrs Susan Margaret Royston (his wife), Mrs Christine Simpson (the resident manager at Ogden Court), Mrs Vera Massey (a neighbour of Mrs Royston) and PC Donna Clare Jones. The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Royston but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mr Royston, Mrs Simpson and Mrs Massey. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Royston's general practitioner records, and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period, as well as to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation. The Inquiry has also considered the Ogden Court diary.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Royston was a widow who lived by herself. Her medical records are sparse, as she did not visit the doctor frequently. She had had periods of depression for which she had been prescribed antidepressants. In March 1992, she fell and, following referral to a consultant physician, it was confirmed that she had suffered a small cerebrovascular accident in the left hemisphere. Her blood pressure was raised and bendrofluazide was prescribed for its control. The consultant said that Mrs Royston had early signs of dementia, which he attributed to cerebrovascular disease. At that time, her speech was slurred, she was a little unsteady and her short-term memory was poor. From that time, Shipman prescribed soluble aspirin daily and she appears to have taken this for the rest of her life.
On 6th
December 1996, Shipman visited Mrs Royston at home and made the following record on the computer:
'frail stiff ent eyes resp cvs abd ok mentally knows day month recent events in news certainly no worse than last year needs GF flat'
.
I interpret that note to mean that Shipman found Mrs Royston to be frail and stiff. Physical examination revealed nothing of note. Testing of mental function showed that there had been no decline since the previous year. Shipman thought she needed a ground floor flat. In the manuscript notes, Shipman also observed that Mrs Royston rarely went out. Her son did her shopping for her. She still cooked for herself and had no home help. It appears that Mrs Royston had become heavily dependent on her family for support.
On Friday, 31st
January 1997, Mr Royston went to the Market Street Surgery. He spoke to the receptionist and asked that Shipman visit his mother. This request is recorded on a visits request form which reads:
'Can u visit...Unable to get out. forgets things. Son a bit worried - condition getting worse - wouldn't let man from S/S in. Upstairs flat - trouble getting down - Son worried - may be a home - don't mention it to her'
.
There is a corresponding entry in the visits book for Monday, 3rd
February which reads:
'Betty Royston... son worried - incontinent - just say routine visit'
.
Three asterisks appear by Mrs Royston's name.
On Saturday, 1st
February 1997, Mr Royston and his wife went to see his mother. His wife helped her with some personal care tasks, changed her bed and made a meal for her. Mr Royston describes her as 'fine' and certainly not ill or depressed. However, in her police statement, Mrs Susan Royston says that she was concerned that her mother-in-law might have had a water infection or a tummy upset.
There is no report of Mrs Royston on 3rd
February but Mrs Simpson, the warden, saw her in the late morning of Tuesday, 4th
February when doing her usual round of visits. She received no further communication from Mrs Royston and, in particular, Mrs Royston did not use the intercom system available in her flat or the emergency pull cords that were available.
The Day of the Death
On the evening of Tuesday, 4th
February 1997, Mr Royston received a telephone call at home from Shipman. This call has been timed at 6.21pm and lasted 6.55 minutes. During the conversation, Shipman told Mr Royston that he had just been to see his mother. He agreed that Mrs Royston was unable to look after herself properly and said that she would be better off in residential care. During the conversation, Shipman also informed Mr Royston that he had taken a sample of blood from Mrs Royston, although he did not say why he had done this.
It was Mrs Royston's habit to visit the launderette at Ogden Court every Wednesday morning with her neighbour, Mrs Massey. On Wednesday, 5th
February, Mrs Massey went to Mrs Royston's flat as usual. Although she believes that it was later, it is clear that this must have been at about 8.30am. Mrs Massey rattled the letterbox but there was no reply. She then went to Mrs Simpson's office and told her that she had been unable to attract Mrs Royston's attention.
Mrs Simpson tried unsuccessfully to contact Mrs Royston on the intercom so she went across to her flat and knocked on the door. There was no response so she opened the door using her Yale pass key. The mortise lock was not engaged. Mr Royston appears to suggest in his Inquiry statement that it was unusual for his mother to leave the door in this state. He seems to be suggesting that his mother would usually have applied the catch so as to prevent the Yale key from opening the door. The evidence about this matter is not very clear.
Mrs Simpson entered the flat and immediately noticed that it was very warm. She went into the living room and saw Mrs Royston's body on the floor. She recalls that Mrs Royston was lying flat on her back with her arms by her sides. She felt the body, which was 'floppy' and still warm. She describes Mrs Royston's complexion as 'yellow waxen' and says that her lips were blue. She noticed that Mrs Royston's glasses were neatly folded on the back of the settee. In her Inquiry statement, she says that the position in which Mrs Royston was lying and the fact that the flat was so hot made her very suspicious about the circumstances of death. She left the flat and returned to her office from where she telephoned Shipman's surgery. She left a message with the receptionist. She then telephoned the police.
Some time later, Shipman appeared. He was walking in the direction of Mrs Royston's flat. Mrs Simpson told him she thought that Mrs Royston was dead and that she had telephoned for the police to attend. Shipman asked why she had telephoned the police and appeared cross. She explained that she had telephoned the police because the death was sudden and that was the procedure as far as she was concerned.
When they reached the flat, Mrs Simpson asked Shipman whether Mrs Royston was indeed dead. Shipman confirmed that she was. Mrs Simpson thought that his attitude was rather casual. He felt Mrs Royston's pulse but made no other examination of the body and did not attempt resuscitation. He told Mrs Simpson that there would be no problem for him to issue a death certificate as he had seen Mrs Royston the previous evening at 7pm. He said, 'Shall we say 8.30?' Or he might have said, 'Shall we say about 8 o'clock?' It was obvious to Mrs Simpson that he was referring to an estimated time of death. Mrs Simpson said that she had no idea as to the time of death. Shipman then left, having been present for only about five minutes. Once he had left, Mrs Simpson put a pillow under Mrs Royston's head and covered her body with a blanket before returning to her office to contact the next of kin and make an entry in her records. She managed to contact Mrs Susan Royston who, in turn, telephoned her husband at work to inform him of the news. They went to Ogden Court as soon as they could.
The police attended at Ogden Court at 9am but did not stay long as it appears that they were told that Shipman would issue an MCCD.
When Mr Royston arrived at the flat he saw his mother, who was still on the floor. Mr Royston recalls that she was lying on her side in what he describes as the recovery position. His recollection differs from Mrs Simpson's. According to Mr Royston, his mother's back was slightly away from the sofa. In his Inquiry statement, he says that it struck him that she seemed to have been placed in position. She was fully clothed. One of her sleeves was rolled up. Mr Royston also noticed that his mother's spectacles had been placed on the back of the settee, although he described them as being in the open position rather than 'folded' as described by Mrs Simpson. Both regarded the position of the spectacles as unusual because Mrs Royston never took them off. Both Mr Royston and his wife were also surprised to see that Mrs Royston's cardigan was on the arm of the settee. As a rule, she did not take it off.
Mr Royston noticed that his mother had been sick. There were three marks of milky-coloured bile on the carpet. The positions of these marks is not clear but at least one of them was near where Mrs Royston was lying and at least one was a short distance away, on the way to the kitchen door. The curtains were closed. Mrs Royston did not usually close them during the day and quite often left them open at night. Mr Royston and his wife have both said that they harboured suspicions about the circumstances of his mother's death and Shipman's role in it.
Later that day, Mr Royston went to Shipman's surgery to collect the MCCD. He asked what had caused his mother's death. Shipman replied that it would be difficult to ascertain the true cause of her death without performing a post-mortem examination. Mr Royston was not enthusiastic about that idea. Shipman went on to say that, since his mother had suffered a slight stroke in the past, perhaps he should put a stroke as the cause of death if Mr Royston agreed. Mr Royston replied, 'You are the doctor, you probably know best'. Shipman's manner was kind and sympathetic.
Certification
On the MCCD and Form B of the cremation certificate, Shipman stated that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident. On Form B, he said that the date and time of death was
'About 21.00 hrs 4.2.97'
. He said that he had attended Mrs Royston for four weeks during her last illness. That was probably untrue, as there is no record of any consultation during that period. He claimed to have last seen Mrs Royston alive about six hours before her death, which would have been at about 3pm. He said he had seen the body about 12 hours after death, and that he had made a complete external examination. The mode of death was said to be
'syncope/collapse'
of seconds in duration. He further stated:
'Found by warden collapsed on floor
from body temp etc dead 12 hours
when seen. Seen by neighbour about
19.00hrs 4/2/97'
.
He stated that no one had been present with Mrs Royston at the time of her death. There is no evidence that a neighbour saw Mrs Royston on the evening of 4th
February. Mrs Massey says that she did not do so and Mrs Simpson says that no one mentioned to her that they had seen Mrs Royston then.
The Expert Evidence
Mrs Royston's medical notes and records were recovered from Shipman's house. The manuscript entry for 4th
February reads:
'4/2/97 V
(
visit
)
BP 170/110 Disc haemorrhage
and exudates.
R plantar
power
R hand
Walking unsteady
HS I II no sign of CHF
D small CVA
BP
Hb Aspirin 75 TOD
U&E Bendrofluazide 5 OD
BS
Review 7/7'
.
Dr Grenville interpreted that record to suggest that Shipman found Mrs Royston's blood pressure was raised at 170/100. He found haemorrhages and exudates in the back of her eye which would suggest long-term high blood pressure. He found the right plantar reflex was upgoing, which is abnormal, and noted reduced power in the right hand. These would be indicative of a right-sided stroke. Mrs Royston's gait was unsteady. Heart sounds were normal and there was no sign of congestive heart failure. Shipman diagnosed a small stroke and high blood pressure. He took a blood sample for haemoglobin, urea and electrolytes and blood sugar. He prescribed aspirin, 75mg daily, and bendrofluazide, which is a mild form of treatment for raised blood pressure. He intended to review Mrs Royston in a week's time.
The computerised medical records contain several entries all made at about 8.30am on 5th
February. They appear to relate to the same visit as described above. Although they are dated 5th February, they relate to 4th February. It appears that Shipman has forgotten to insert the date and, by default, the computer has recorded the date on which the entry was made. One of the entries reads:
'05/02/97 CVA unspecified...r plantar up power down r walk poor see notes dementia worse bloods and review wed son rung after surgewry
(
sic
)
chat re housing to thinl
(
sic
)
of eph'
.
This indicates that Shipman had telephoned Mr Royston after the evening surgery and had spoken to him about his mother's admission to an elderly persons' home. Other entries on the computer record the results of the blood tests, all of which were normal.
Mrs Royston's death is not recorded in either the manuscript or computerised records. Dr Grenville describes as a 'glaring omission' Shipman's failure to tell Mr Royston that he had found clinical signs that his mother had suffered another stroke at the time of his visit on 4th
February. Of course, it would be a glaring omission if those signs had in truth been present. The question is whether or not they were.
Dr Grenville expressed his opinion on this case as follows:
'It is theoretically possible that on the day that Shipman decided to visit Mrs Royston, following a non urgent request from her son to review her she coincidentally developed a stroke on that day, that Shipman failed to provide adequate support for her and that she subsequently died of a stroke. Such a coincidence is, however, statistically extremely improbable and, in my opinion, stretches credulity to its limits. Given my knowledge of Shipman's behaviour I believe it is several orders of magnitude more probable that Shipman was involved in Mrs Royston's death and that his record of his consultation with her is inaccurate'.
Professor Richard Baker assessed the level of suspicion based upon the medical records as moderate, presumably taking account of the known previous cerebrovascular episode. He assessed the level of suspicion on the basis of the cremation forms as high.
Shipman's Movements
The appointments sheet for 4th
February shows that Shipman's morning surgery started as usual at 8.45am. Open surgery was due to begin at 10.15am and was attended by seven patients. It would have finished no earlier than 11.15am, after which Shipman would have completed paperwork, which would probably have occupied him until the antenatal clinic began at noon. This would usually last for about an hour. So Shipman would have been free to undertake visits between about 1pm and 4pm when the afternoon surgery began. Open surgery started at 5.15pm. Nine patients attended so that it is unlikely to have finished much before the time that Shipman telephoned Mr Royston. It therefore seems likely that he visited Mrs Royston between 1pm and 4pm.
Conclusion
There are a number of suspicious circumstances surrounding this case.
Shipman was asked to visit Mrs Royston because her son was concerned about her ability to look after herself. He was not called because she had suddenly developed acute symptoms. Although she had suffered a stroke in 1992 and must have been at some risk of another, it would be a considerable coincidence had she suddenly developed symptoms of a further stroke during or shortly before Shipman's visit.
I am satisfied that Shipman visited Mrs Royston between 1pm and 4pm on 4th
February. There is no evidence that anyone saw her alive or spoke to her after that time. In a building such as Ogden Court, it is highly likely that someone would have seen her if she had set foot outside her front door. It is also highly likely that that person would have mentioned this sighting to Mrs Simpson on learning of Mrs Royston's death. Although it is not possible to say with certainty that no one saw her alive or spoke to her after Shipman's visit, it is highly unlikely that anyone did. I am confident that Shipman's claim that a neighbour saw her at 7pm was a deliberate lie. He had no source of information that would not have also been available to Mrs Simpson. I am also satisfied that he told that lie so as to give the impression that he was not the last person to see Mrs Royston alive. In my view, he was the last person to see her alive.
Shipman telephoned Mr Royston after his visit. He did not tell him that his mother had shown clinical signs of having suffered a stroke. It is virtually inconceivable that a competent doctor would have failed to mention his findings and his diagnosis to a relative to whom he was speaking, and that he would have left a patient in that condition unattended. It appears to me that Shipman's note of his consultation on 4th
February was a fabrication, designed to lend plausibility to the cause of death that he was later to certify.
Mrs Royston's spectacles and cardigan had been removed and placed on the sofa, although she usually wore both. She might well have removed both before having a blood sample taken, but, if she had been alive for long after that process, one would have expected her to roll down her sleeve and put her cardigan and spectacles back on. This is a suspicious factor.
Mr Royston thought that the body had been laid out tidily on the floor. People do not usually die 'tidily' in a natural death. However, if Shipman killed her, he could easily have straightened Mrs Royston's body.
It does not appear that Mrs Royston attempted to use the intercom or one of the emergency cords. Dr Grenville says that patients who suffer even a massive stroke of the kind that can kill suddenly usually have enough time to make some effort to summon help. If Mrs Royston died as the result of a lethal injection, she would not have attempted to summon help.
So far, everything points to an unlawful killing. The only piece of evidence that might cast doubt on the conclusion that Shipman had killed Mrs Royston is that patches of vomit were observed in the room where she was found. As Dr Grenville has said, patients who are suffering a stroke or heart attack often vomit. However, Dr Grenville has also explained (in giving evidence in the case of Mrs Mary Coutts) that morphine or diamorphine can cause a patient to be sick. The presence of vomit on the body or close to it is not inconsistent with death by lethal injection of diamorphine, Shipman's known method of killing. Here, the vomit was found not far from the body. As the body was found on the floor and appeared to have been 'arranged', I cannot deduce where Mrs Royston was when she was injected. It follows that, although the position of the vomit is slightly puzzling, I do not think it raises any real doubt in my mind that this was an unlawful killing. It is possible that the explanation is that part of the injection entered Mrs Royston's body subcutaneously and took longer to act than it would have done if all the injection had gone straight into a vein. In that event, she might have moved about the room and been sick before collapsing to the floor, where Shipman arranged her body.
The evidence pointing to Shipman's involvement in this death is compelling. My conclusion is that Shipman killed Mrs Royston by giving an injection of strong opiate during the afternoon of 4th
February 1997. I feel able to say that I am sure of that conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001