The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Eileen Robinson
Introduction
Mrs Eileen Robinson was found dead at her home, 47 Marlborough Road, Gee Cross, Hyde on Thursday, 23rd
December 1993 at the age of 54. Mrs Robinson's death is entered in the register of deaths as having occurred on Wednesday, 22nd
December 1993, and I have concluded, from the evidence available to the Inquiry, that this is when she died. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She had a very high opinion of him and he was known to visit her at home quite regularly. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis resulting from hypertension.
In November 1998, following Shipman's arrest, Mrs Robinson's elder daughter, Mrs Heather Lynne de-Rome, contacted the police, expressing concern about the circumstances of her mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs de-Rome, Miss Andrea Kay Robinson (Mrs Robinson's younger daughter), Mr Charles David McCrosson and Mrs Gladys Bridge (Mrs Robinson's neighbours).
Shipman was not prosecuted in respect of Mrs Robinson's death but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has obtained statements from Mrs de-Rome, Miss Robinson, Mr McCrosson, Mr John Robinson (Mrs Robinson's former husband) and Ms Christine Blake (Mrs Robinson's neighbour). Mrs de-Rome and Mr McCrosson gave oral evidence at a hearing on 8th
October 2001. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Robinson's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
Personal Background
Mrs Robinson had lived alone following her divorce in 1986. She was a small and somewhat overweight lady. Her main medical problem was valgus deformities of her feet and ankles with osteoarthritis. As a result, she suffered considerable pain and her mobility was reduced. In August 1993, she was supplied with surgical shoes and her name was put on a waiting list for a subtalar arthrodesis or stiffening of the left foot. She expected to have the operation in the New Year of 1994. The condition of her right foot was also said to be deteriorating.
The other problem which appears from her medical records was persistent high blood pressure. This was first noted on 8th
July 1992, when it was 190/100, and there is a note that it should be checked again in two weeks' time. It is not clear whether this was done, nor is there any indication that medication was prescribed. On 25th
August 1993, her blood pressure was 200/110 and she was started on Zestril 5mg. The dosage was increased on 2nd
September to 10mg. The blood pressure remained high on the next two attendances. At the second of these, on 17th
November, Shipman noted
'wait for tape'
, presumably a reference to the tape of an electronic measure of blood pressure giving a series of measurements taken on 24th
and 25th
November. The average blood pressure over the period was 197/113. Mrs Robinson appears to have seen the practice nurse on 27th
November 1993; she advised continuation of the same dose of Zestril, presumably on the basis of the information contained on the tape. At the visit of 17th
November, Shipman had noted that blood samples should be taken at the next visit. There is no evidence that Mrs Robinson visited the surgery again after 27th
November.
As a result of her poor mobility, Mrs Robinson's activities were somewhat limited and she did not go out much. She saw her two daughters regularly. They were aware that she was apprehensive about the forthcoming operation on her foot but thought that she was otherwise in good health.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
Mrs de-Rome thinks that she saw her mother on the Wednesday of the week before her death, which would have been 15th
December. It is possible that she saw her on Sunday, 19th
December. Mrs Robinson was planning to get in food and drink for Christmas. Miss Robinson saw her mother on 17th
December when she appeared well.
Ms Blake went to see Mrs Robinson one morning in the week of her death. She thought it was either 22nd
or 23rd
December. It cannot have been 23rd
December, as Mrs Robinson was found dead at about 2pm on 23rd
December and her body showed signs that she had been dead for quite some time. More likely, Ms Blake went on 22nd
December. The two women talked about Mrs Robinson's foot problem. She was rather 'worked up' about the operation and mentioned that her blood pressure had gone up. She said the nurse was coming to measure it. She said nothing about the doctor coming.
The Day of the Death
On 22nd
December 1993, the practice records show that a visit was to be made to Mrs Robinson to take blood samples. It appears that Shipman visited and took the samples, as the results are reported in the medical notes. There is no computerised record of that visit. However, Shipman made a manuscript note, which says:
'230/126 allowing for fat arm
increase Zestril to 20mg
will see 7/7 ?
ref
No chest pain only indigestion
?? angina
HS I II no oedema
no CHF
BP
Advised to ring re
chest pain to take it very quiet'
.
I interpret this note to indicate that Shipman found Mrs Robinson's blood pressure was 230/126 but realised that, because of the size of her arm, the reading might not be accurate. However, it was raised and he directed that she should increase the dose of Zestril, the medication prescribed to control her blood pressure. He decided to see her again in a week's time. He wondered whether to refer her, presumably to a consultant physician. He seems to have asked her whether she had any chest pain but she said no, only indigestion. He wondered if she had angina. Heart sounds were normal and there was no swelling of the ankles. There was no sign of congestive heart failure. He repeated that the blood pressure was raised and she was advised to telephone him about her chest pain (presumably if it worsened) and to take things quietly. The note raises, for the first time, a question mark over Mrs Robinson's cardiac health.
The Inquiry has been able to find no evidence from anyone who saw or spoke to Mrs Robinson after Shipman's visit on 22nd
December. Ms Blake, who shared a party wall with Mrs Robinson, said that she usually heard Mrs Robinson moving about in the evening but did not do so on the night before her body was found.
Despite the fact that, in the manuscript note which I have quoted, Shipman contemplated revisiting in seven days' time, the surgery visits book and his own visits book both record an intention to revisit on the following day, Thursday, 23rd
December.
At about 2pm on Thursday, 23rd
December, Shipman called at the house of Mrs Robinson's next door neighbour, Mr McCrosson. Shipman introduced himself as Mrs Robinson's doctor and said he was concerned about her because she had 'missed an appointment' that day. That was a lie. He asked if he could come through Mr McCrosson's house to the back to look over the fence into Mrs Robinson's back room and see if she was there. Mrs Robinson usually sat in her dining room, which was at the back of the house. Both men therefore went to stand on a wall from which they could see into Mrs Robinson's dining room. They could see Mrs Robinson lying face down on the floor. Mr McCrosson did not have a key to Mrs Robinson's house so he dialled 999, intending to call the police. When the operator asked whether he wanted an ambulance as well as the police, Shipman took over the telephone and appeared to Mr McCrosson to indicate that no ambulance was required, and certainly none attended. He said something to the effect that there was no need for that as he had seen this kind of thing all too often.
The message received by the police at 2.02pm was:
'FEMALE COLLAPSED
DOCTOR AT SCENE SAYS FEMALE WAS VERY POORLY YESTERDAY AND IS PROBABLY DEAD. NEIGHBOUR AND DOCTOR ABOUT TO BREAK DOOR DOWN. AMB NOT REQUIRED'
.
It is apparent that Shipman decided that an ambulance was not needed on the basis of what he had seen over the garden wall and through the window.
Mr McCrosson broke into the house and he and Shipman went in together. They found Mrs Robinson lying on the floor face down, fully dressed in day clothes with her legs straight out and parallel. With the benefit of hindsight, Mr McCrosson's impression was that she did not seem to have fallen naturally into that position. Between them, the two men turned the body over and Mr McCrosson saw that Mrs Robinson's arms were crossed over her chest. He also noticed dark bruises on her face and discolouration on her legs. Shipman remarked that this was due to the effect of gravity. Shipman made no detailed examination of the body. He suggested to Mr McCrosson that Mrs Robinson had died at about 9pm the previous evening. The curtains in the room were open.
The police arrived at 2.41pm and Shipman telephoned a member of the family, Mr Roy McKeon. Both Mrs Robinson's daughters came while Shipman was still there. He told them that Mrs Robinson had died of a coronary thrombosis and that a post-mortem examination would not be needed. They found his attitude cold and rather arrogant. Mr McCrosson thought he was very nonchalant. The daughters noticed a small patch of blood on the carpet in front of the chair on which it seemed Mrs Robinson had been sitting immediately before she fell to the floor. One daughter also noticed blood on Mrs Robinson's mouth.
There is no computerised note relating to the visit on 23rd
December. The final manuscript note is timed and dated
'14.15'
on 22nd
December 1993; it seems likely that this should be dated 23rd
December. It reads:
'Broke in - patient
Cold Rigor mortis
12 hours
dead
'
.
I interpret this to mean that Shipman had broken in and found the patient dead. She was cold and rigor mortis was present. He thought she had been dead for about 12 hours.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death is not now available, but its counterfoil has been recovered. Shipman wrote that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis caused by hypertension. He said that he had last seen Mrs Robinson alive on the day of her death. He had seen the body after death and there would be no post-mortem examination.
Form B of the cremation certificate is available. In it, Shipman stated the time of death as
'About midnight'
. If that were so, it would be difficult to explain the fact that Mrs Robinson was wearing her day clothes and the curtains in the dining room were open. Shipman also stated that he had attended Mrs Robinson for four months during her 'last illness' and that he had last seen her 12 hours before her death. That, on his calculation as to the time of death, would mean that he had seen her at about midday on 22nd
December. He said that he had seen her about 15 hours after death, which would put his post-death visit at about 3pm. Shipman claimed to have made a complete external examination. He said that the mode of death was
'Collapse'
taking
'seconds only'
and stated that this was based on his own observations, adding,
'Broke in with police found on floor dead'
. He stated that no one was present at the death.
From the appointments sheets for 22nd
December, it appears that Shipman could have visited Mrs Robinson on that day at any time between about noon and 1.45pm or between about 2.45pm and 3.45pm.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker examined the cremation certificate and concluded that the circumstances of the death were highly suspicious. No doubt he had in mind that Shipman had seen the patient shortly before her death was discovered and was present at the discovery. He might also have been suspicious of Shipman's assertion that the mode of death was collapse of only seconds' duration, which he could not have known as no one had been present.
Conclusion
This death is highly suspicious. Shipman is known to have visited Mrs Robinson on 22nd
December, for the purpose of taking a blood sample. No one is known to have seen her alive or spoken to her after that visit. I recognise, of course, that it is possible that someone did see her or speak to her and that the police and the Inquiry have failed to locate that person, but I think that is unlikely.
Mrs Robinson had raised blood pressure, which put her at a significantly increased risk of suffering a stroke. It also put her at a slightly increased risk of suffering a heart attack. However, until 22nd
December, there was no suggestion that she had any cardiac signs or symptoms. Anyone looking at her records on 21st
December would not have thought that she was at any real risk of having a heart attack.
I am deeply suspicious of Shipman's note of 22nd
December. There is no doubt that he visited her on that day for the purpose of taking blood samples. He did so and sent them to the laboratory for analysis; the results came back on 24th
December. I observe that his manuscript note did not refer to the blood samples. I can see that, given Mrs Robinson's history of raised blood pressure, Shipman would naturally take the opportunity of taking a reading while visiting. If the result was high, as he claimed, he might well wish to adjust the medication. The note then suggests that, when he asked if she had any chest pain, Mrs Robinson told him that she did not, only indigestion, thereby implying or admitting that she did have some symptoms of pain or discomfort in her chest. Shipman then suggested that she might have angina. He found no positive signs of any cardiac problem but he claims to have advised Mrs Robinson to take things easy and to contact him if she had chest pain. The effect of this is to suggest to the reader that, in fact, Mrs Robinson had a heart condition.
This entry is typical of many I have seen in cases where Shipman has killed a patient. In this type of case, he begins a consultation by noting the matter for which the appointment or visit has been made. He then goes on to deal with another matter, which apparently gives rise to some concern and which subsequently turns out to be related to the cause of the death which follows shortly. In other cases, I have found that these 'hybrid' entries, part true, part false, are highly suspicious. I suspect that the latter half of this record is false and was designed to put a question mark over Mrs Robinson's cardiac health. I think it unlikely that she had been suffering from any chest pain, whether or not she attributed it to indigestion. If she had had chest pain, it is likely she would have mentioned it to her daughters or consulted Shipman about it voluntarily.
I suspect that Shipman took a blood sample from Mrs Robinson on 22nd
December and then, under the guise of taking another sample, injected her with diamorphine.
Shipman told a lie when he arrived at Mr McCrosson's house in the early afternoon of 23rd
December. He claimed that he was concerned because Mrs Robinson had missed an appointment. She had not. In my view, it is far more likely that Shipman was concerned that he had not been called out to certify Mrs Robinson's death, although he knew she had been dead for about 24 hours. I think he would have become anxious and would wish to create an excuse for 'discovering' the body. I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Robinson.
I find it remarkable and highly suspicious that Shipman should have been prepared to decide that an ambulance was not necessary after seeing Mrs Robinson's body through the window. Unless he had been present at her death, he could not possibly have known that she was dead. To call an ambulance would have been the most obvious preparation for dealing with an emergency if she were alive.
The account written down by the police of what Shipman said to the emergency services operator is not consistent with the note which Shipman made, apparently on 22nd
December. In the note he suggested obliquely that Mrs Robinson might have a heart problem. To the police he said that she was 'very poorly' the day before. One must ask, if she had been 'very poorly', why had he not admitted her to hospital or at the very least alerted her daughters to her condition?
Mrs Robinson's position and appearance in death, lying on her front with her legs straight out, are not what one would expect if she had suffered a heart attack and fallen from her chair. Mr McCrosson now has the impression that the body had been straightened out.
In Form B, Shipman sought to suggest that the death had occurred in the night. That would have the effect of putting it probably about 10-12 hours after his own visit on 22nd
December. He could not have known when the death occurred (unless he had been present). He could not have made any sensible estimate from body temperature, although on some occasions he claimed to do so. He could only have said that the death was not recent when the body was found, as rigor mortis was present and there was discoloration on the legs. In any event, if the death occurred at midnight, it is surprising that Mrs Robinson was sitting downstairs, dressed in day clothes and with the curtains open. If one wants to make an estimate of the time of death, it would seem necessary to take such factors into account. In my view, Shipman said that the death occurred at midnight in order to distance himself from the death.
Finally, if Shipman really had had a consultation with Mrs Robinson, which had proceeded on the lines of the note he made in the records, he could not possibly have certified honestly that her death a few hours later was due to a heart attack. He would have had no idea of what had caused her death. The case would have been a sudden and unexpected death of which the cause was not known. The death should have been referred to the coroner. Shipman did not refer it.
Taking all these factors into account, I am left in no doubt that Shipman must have killed Mrs Robinson, almost certainly by giving her an injection of diamorphine, under the guise of taking a blood sample.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001