The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ernest Rudol
Introduction
Mr Ernest Rudol died at his home, 11 Forrest Road, Haughton Green, Denton on Thursday, 29th
June 1995 at the age of 82. He had probably been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Mr Rudol thought highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Rudol's death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
In October 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mr Rudol's family expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of his death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mr Rudol's son, Mr Christopher James Rudol. The police spoke to Mrs Catherine Shaw, who worked for the meals on wheels service, but did not take a statement from her concerning the death.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Rudol but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Christopher Rudol and his wife, Mrs Margaret Rudol, Mrs Shaw, and Mrs Elizabeth Darragh, a relief warden at the Forrest Road Community Centre. The Inquiry has had access to Mr Rudol's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Rudol was a widower who lived alone in a bungalow, which was part of a complex of sheltered accommodation attached to the Forrest Road Community Centre. His son and daughter-in-law lived not far away and his son would visit him several times a week. In addition, he was supervised by Mrs Jean McGrath, the resident warden of the centre, and Mrs Darragh, the relief warden, who was on duty one day a week. Mrs McGrath died in 1996.
Mr Rudol did not enjoy the best of health. He suffered from kidney failure, hypertension and type II diabetes. He had been catheterised and had to use incontinence pads. He also suffered from intermittent claudication of the legs. On 3rd
January 1995, he had a blood transfusion for anaemia. In respect of his renal problems, he had been referred to the Manchester Royal Infirmary. At review in March 1995, he was said to be reasonably well. In April, it was reported that he remained well and had no major problems with his catheter. There is an entry in the medical records for 10th
May 1995, which records a consultation at the surgery when the catheter was in situ and the urine was clear. There is no further entry until shortly before Mr Rudol's death.
Mr Rudol's son says that, despite his many medical complaints, his father was still independent and able to go out alone. He still enjoyed a daily visit to his local public house. However, Mr Rudol must have been at a considerably increased risk of suffering a stroke, on account of his hypertension and diabetes.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
On 27th
June 1995, Mr Rudol attended a review appointment at Manchester Royal Infirmary. From a report written on 28th
June, it appears that Mr Rudol told the doctor that he had fallen the previous day and had hurt his right hand and left shoulder. His chest hurt when he coughed. He was thoroughly examined and it was concluded that he had not suffered any serious injury. His blood pressure was recorded as 180/80. Pulse was 80 beats per minute and the heart was in sinus rhythm, which is normal. There was no oedema. The chest was clear. It appears that there was no particular cause for concern about Mr Rudol's general health on that day and no sign that he had suffered a stroke. That report was not received at Shipman's surgery until after Mr Rudol's death.
Mr Christopher Rudol spent the evening of Tuesday, 27th
June with his father. He does not remember his father raising any new health problems in the days before his death. He does not recall his father's fall. His evidence is that his father was coping well following his discharge from hospital after the blood transfusion in January 1995.
There is an entry in the computerised medical records dated 26th
June 1995, which refers to
'Accidental falls'
. It is likely that this entry derives from information received from Manchester Royal Infirmary after the death. As the audit trail facility had not been installed at that time, it has not been possible to check when that entry was made.
There is also a computerised entry dated 27th
June 1995, which suggests that a blood pressure reading was taken, but the result is not recorded. There is no corresponding entry in the appointments sheets, visits book or practice nurse's diary for that date. As Mr Rudol's blood pressure was taken during his attendance at the renal clinic on 27th
June, it is possible that this entry was made after the death and relates to that appointment and not to a consultation with Shipman.
The Day of the Death
Mr Rudol telephoned his daughter-in-law on the morning of Thursday, 29th
June 1995. He was rather upset, as he did not have the correct type of incontinence pads. She went to his house at about 9am and telephoned the district nurse who usually attended to him. The nurse agreed to come out to the flat later that day. Mr Rudol then settled down. He said he would be all right on his own so Mrs Rudol went to work. As she left, Mr Rudol asked her to leave the door open, as it was a hot day.
Mrs Darragh worked a split shift. In the morning she worked from 7.30am until 11.30am and later she worked from 5pm until 10.30pm. She called on Mr Rudol as usual, she thinks, at about 9am. She recalls that, when she visited Mr Rudol that morning, he appeared agitated and confused. She thought he was 'worked up' about his colostomy bag. She recalls that there was a nurse present although this might have been Mrs Rudol, as the nurses usually came later than 9am. When Mrs Darragh left, about ten minutes later, the 'nurse' was still there. Mrs Darragh's recollection of the events of 29th
June is unclear. It is possible that she called in again to see Mr Rudol before she finished work at 11.30am, because she has a recollection that he calmed down and was more comfortable after the nurse had seen him, although she is far from sure about this.
The records department at Tameside and Glossop Community and Priority Services has been contacted by the Inquiry and, although it has been confirmed that a nurse visited Mr Rudol on 29th
June, and the name of that nurse is known, the nursing records no longer exist. The nurse who attended has no recollection of doing so.
At some time, probably between 12.30pm and 1.30pm, the meals on wheels service delivered Mr Rudol's lunch. It has not been possible to ascertain at what time the food was delivered or what was Mr Rudol's state of health at that time. However, it is reasonable to infer that he was not obviously ill.
Mrs Darragh returned to Mr Rudol's flat at the start of her evening shift at 5pm. She found the front and back doors open. She found Mr Rudol sitting in his usual chair, and looking as though he was asleep. As she approached, she realised that he was dead. She touched his hand, which was still warm, although she did note 'some coldness creeping in'. Rigor mortis had not set in and Mrs Darragh was of the opinion that Mr Rudol had not been dead very long - no more than one hour and a half hours. Although Mrs Darragh is experienced in the care of the elderly and must have seen the bodies of many recently deceased patients, Dr John Grenville has said in his generic evidence that establishing the time of death accurately is a complex procedure, and the estimate provided by Mrs Darragh must be viewed with caution.
Mrs Darragh telephoned Mr Christopher Rudol and told him of his father's death. She also telephoned Shipman. Mr Christopher Rudol and his wife went immediately to the bungalow. They saw Mr Rudol in his chair, wearing his usual daytime clothes: tracksuit bottoms, a short-sleeved polo shirt and slippers. Although he appeared to be asleep, he was seated upright with his head bowed slightly forward and saliva was dripping from his mouth. Mrs Rudol says that her father-in-law looked peaceful.
In his statement to the police, Mr Christopher Rudol said that the meal left by the meals on wheels service was on a table by his father's side. It was untouched and still sealed. He said that his father usually had a good appetite and would eat his meal. However, he added that his father had not been well that day. Mrs Rudol's recollection is slightly different. She recalls that the meal was in the kitchen and not on the table beside Mr Rudol. She confirms that it remained sealed.
Shipman arrived shortly afterwards. He said that he had seen Mr Rudol that afternoon, that he had suffered a stroke and that he was planning to come back, possibly the next day. This struck Mrs Rudol as odd, as in her opinion someone suffering a stroke should not be left alone and help should have been summoned. According to Mr Christopher Rudol, Shipman did not examine his father in any way. Shipman said that, as he had seen Mr Rudol that afternoon, there would be no need for a post-mortem examination. Both Mr and Mrs Rudol remember Shipman as unsympathetic, in contrast to his usual manner.
There is an entry in the visits book for 29th
June, which records:
'fell 2 days. shaking. had X-Ray'
. There is also an entry for 30th
June, which records an intention to revisit. That entry has been crossed out.
There is an entry in the acute prescriptions book for 29th
June, which records:
'Leg back Uriplan Code 3L 350ml'
. This obviously relates to Mr Rudol's urinary management.
In the computerised records for 29th
June, there are entries relating to a consultation which occurred while Mr Rudol was alive. These read:
'Seen in own home.
CVA unspecified left leg arm 170/100.
Had a chat to patient can cope review morne'
.
I interpret those entries to suggest that Shipman visited Mr Rudol at home on 29th
June and found that he had had a stroke. It appears that he recorded weakness in the left arm and leg. Blood pressure was 170/100. As Mr Rudol is supposed to have said that he could cope at home, it appears that Shipman was content to leave him alone and did not think it necessary to inform Mr Rudol's son about his father's condition. He appears to have decided to review the position the following day; hence the intention to revisit noted in the visits book.
The final computer entry for the day of the death briefly records that Mr Rudol was dead on examination.
Shipman's Movements on the Day of the Death
Shipman saw nine patients in the open surgery from 10.30am. This was fewer than usual and, even allowing for Shipman's somewhat extended consultations, he would have finished his surgery commitments by about 11.30am. The afternoon surgery did not begin until 4pm. Shipman attended a postgraduate training course at Tameside General Hospital between about 1pm and 2pm. In addition to visiting Mr Rudol, Shipman had one other visit, to a patient who lived on Cambourne Road, Hattersley. Shipman could have visited Mr Rudol at any time between about 11.30am and 12.45pm, or at any time between about 2.15pm and 3.45pm.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and stated that the cause of Mr Rudol's death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension. He said that renal failure had contributed to the death but was not related to the cerebrovascular accident. The interval between the onset of the cerebrovascular accident and death was said to be two days. Shipman said that he had last seen Mr Rudol alive on the day of his death
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He gave the time of death as
'1500hrs'
, although that is written over another time, possibly
'1300hrs'
. Shipman said that he had attended Mr Rudol for 24 hours during his final illness. He said that he had last seen him alive about two to three hours before the death and had seen and examined the body about an hour after death. On Shipman's timings, he was suggesting that he had seen Mr Rudol alive between noon and 1pm and had then seen the body at about 4pm. As it was Mrs Darragh who found the body and as she did not come on duty until 5pm, Shipman's claim to have seen the body at 4pm must be inaccurate. Shipman gave the cause of death as on the MCCD and said that the mode of death was syncope of only seconds' duration. When asked whether his answers to the questions relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others, he wrote:
'own
son's'
. He said that no one had been present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker has reviewed this case and on the basis of the contents both of the cremation certificate and Mr Rudol's medical records, found that the death was highly suspicious. He commented as follows with regard to the medical records:
'Sudden cva, very little information at al
(sic)
in the records, difficult to judge on the veracity of the story...
Sudden death after a visit from HFS; very scanty records relating to the death'
.
Conclusion
There are a number of highly suspicious features to this death. The first and most obvious is that the death was discovered not long after a visit by Shipman, at which he had been alone with Mr Rudol. No one saw Mr Rudol alive or spoke to him after Shipman's visit. That factor, in itself, is sufficient to give rise to strong suspicion.
Mr Rudol was not in the best of health at the time of his death and must have been at a significantly increased risk of suffering a stroke. He had a fall on 26th
June, the day before his appointment at the renal clinic. However, he was very thoroughly examined by the doctor at the clinic and was not found to be showing any signs of a stroke at that time. I think it highly unlikely that the clinic doctor would have missed signs of a stroke if they had been present.
On the morning of the day of his death, Mr Rudol was upset and telephoned his daughter-in-law. At some time that morning, someone telephoned the surgery to request a visit. This might have been Mr Rudol or it could have been Mrs Darragh, Mrs Rudol or the district nurse. In any event, the message was that Mr Rudol had had a fall two days earlier and was shaky. There was no sense of urgency about this and nothing that clearly suggested that Mr Rudol had had a stroke. I think it highly unlikely that Mr Rudol was showing any signs of a stroke that morning, as, if he had been, I think at least one of his visitors would have observed something seriously amiss.
Shipman must have visited either in the late morning or early afternoon. In the medical records and on the MCCD and Form B, he has sought to suggest that, when he arrived, he found that Mr Rudol had had a stroke and concluded that this had begun two days earlier. I think that this suggestion was misleading and probably a deliberate lie. Mr Rudol had not had a stroke when his son saw him in the evening two days before his death. Nor was he showing any signs of a stroke in the early morning of 29th June. It is possible that Mr Rudol had suffered a stroke after the last of his visitors had left and before Shipman arrived, but this would be something of a coincidence. In any event, that is not what Shipman has sought to suggest. I think it highly likely that Mr Rudol was showing no signs of a stroke at all. Had he been weak on one side, as Shipman claims, it is inconceivable that he could responsibly leave Mr Rudol completely unattended. In my view, Shipman has created a false history of a stroke. He has also sought to suggest that Mr Rudol's son was in a position to provide information relevant to the cause or mode of death. This is misleading, as Mr Rudol's son knew nothing of the circumstances of the death.
In his generic evidence, Dr Grenville explained that, where a patient suffers an occlusive stroke, the type of stroke that causes weakness on one side of the body, the patient does not usually die. If the stroke does prove fatal, death usually occurs following a gradual deterioration in the patient's level of consciousness. The changes usually occur over a period of several days but certainly at least over a number of hours. It would be most unusual for a patient to die suddenly of an occlusive stroke. A brain stem haemorrhage can cause sudden death but it would be most unusual for a patient to have two different types of stroke at about the same time. This is a further reason for suspecting Shipman's claim that this death was due to a stroke.
Mr Rudol's appearance in death was wholly typical of many of Shipman's patients who had been killed by lethal injection of diamorphine.
I have come to the conclusion that the only sensible inference I can draw from the evidence is that Shipman killed Mr Rudol. I think it likely that, when he heard that Mr Rudol had had a fall, Shipman seized on that as an opportunity to kill Mr Rudol and to pass off his death as being due to a stroke. I am sure of this conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001