The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Tom Balfour Russell
Introduction
Mr Tom Balfour Russell died at his home, 18 Harrison Street, Gee Cross, Hyde on Tuesday, 2nd
July 1996 at the age of 77. He had been a patient of Shipman since July 1995, and thought highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Russell's death was congestive heart failure due to arteriosclerosis.
In September 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mr Russell's son, Mr Neil Balfour Russell, contacted the police about the circumstances of his father's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Neil Russell and from a neighbour of Mr Russell, Mrs Karen Hesford.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Russell but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has obtained statements from Mr Neil Russell, his wife, Mrs Ann Russell, and District Nurse Marion Gilchrist. The Inquiry has had access to Mr Russell's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Russell was a retired engineering fitter who lived alone following the death of his wife. Mr Neil Russell says that, until July 1995, Mr Russell enjoyed very good health. He used to walk long distances. In July 1995, he began to suffer from swollen ankles, and he found it difficult to walk. At that time, Mr Russell decided he was not satisfied with his general practitioner and transferred to Shipman, whom he knew, as his wife had babysat for Shipman's children and had also worked for him as a receptionist until her retirement in 1986. Soon after he registered with Shipman, it was found that Mr Russell had diabetes. This condition was monitored regularly at the surgery.
According to Dr Grenville, the records reveal that Mr Russell was also in chronic atrial fibrillation and was at risk of sudden death from cardiac causes. In May 1996, he developed severe congestive cardiac failure. The visits book shows that, on 16th
May 1996, he complained of diarrhoea, shortness of breath, cough and backache, and the computerised records show that Shipman diagnosed congestive heart failure and arranged emergency hospital admission. He was found to have pericarditis. His condition stabilised on treatment and, on 18th
June 1996, he was discharged home with a referral to a cardiologist. A home assessment report, compiled on 18th
June 1996, records that he was very weak and was unable to cook every day or walk any distance outside. His bed was brought downstairs.
Arrangements were made for his blood sugar to be monitored by Nurse Gilchrist. Mrs Hesford remembers that Shipman used to visit Mr Russell to check on his progress, but there is no evidence of this in the medical records and the only entry in the visits book, between 16th
May and the date of death, is for 20th
June, presumably for a post-discharge assessment.
Mr Neil Russell last saw his father on Saturday, 30th
June 1996, when he took him into Stockport to do some shopping. They bought a television. Mr Russell was tired but was otherwise in good spirits.
Mr Neil Russell spoke to his father by telephone at some time between that Saturday and the Tuesday on which he died, although he is unable to recall exactly when this conversation took place. During that conversation, Mr Russell still sounded in good spirits and his son was not particularly concerned about his health.
The Day of the Death
Nurse Gilchrist visited Mr Russell at about 8.30am on the day of his death and took a sample of blood for a diabetes test. Her recollection is that he appeared well and she had no concern over his health. Within the medical notes and records, however, is a home visit request slip, dated 2nd
July 1996 and timed at 8.45am, which records that Nurse Gilchrist made a request for a doctor to visit Mr Russell. No reason for this request has been noted and Nurse Gilchrist can remember neither making this request nor why she would have done so. Her diary does not mention the reason. She has a 'vague memory' of visiting Shipman's surgery after she had seen Mr Russell, and asking why it was necessary for Mr Russell to have so many daily visits when his blood sugar levels had remained unchanged during the time she had been nursing him. She cannot remember whether she had this conversation with Shipman or his receptionist. She thinks it likely that Shipman would have responded by visiting Mr Russell later that day.
Mrs Hesford visited Mr Russell that morning and remembers that he seemed well. After a while, she left to do Mr Russell's errands. She returned at about midday or 1pm to leave his shopping. She found him sitting at the kitchen table. He seemed well.
Mr Neil Russell went to visit his father at about 6.45pm, shortly after he had dropped off his son in Gee Cross for a piano lesson. He looked in through a window and saw his father sitting at the table with his head down. He let himself into the house. He approached his father and realised that he had died. Mr Russell looked very peaceful. He was fully dressed and his clothing appeared undisturbed. Mr Neil Russell called for an ambulance to attend and paramedics, Ms Yvonne Warrington and Mr Gary Ham, attended. Ms Warrington remembers only that the body was found seated upright at the kitchen table. The paramedics telephoned for Shipman to attend and he arrived at the house soon afterwards.
Shipman told Mr Neil Russell that his father had died at 5.30pm. When Mrs Ann Russell arrived at the house, she put her arm around her father-in-law. Shipman frowned at this. When she suggested that they should lay Mr Russell down on the bed, Shipman snapped at her and said that she had been reading too many horror stories. Shipman did not examine Mr Russell, but said that he had visited him at 2pm that afternoon and had found him to be in good spirits. Shipman expressed his sympathy and said that Mr Russell had enjoyed a good life and that he had died at home, which was what he had wanted.
Mr Neil Russell noted that the house was very tidy. He told the Inquiry that his father was a meticulous person, who lived his day according to a very rigid routine. It was Mr Russell's habit to prepare his tea at about 5.30pm. According to Mr Neil Russell, if his father had died at 5.30pm, as suggested by Shipman, the kitchen would have been untidy because his father would have been in the process of preparing his evening meal.
Shipman made the following entry which appears in the handwritten medical records for the day of death:
'Eating
Sleep OK bed downstairs
PU B/O feels
OK
Ankle oedema
JVP
liver 2 fb.
no
dyspnoea.
HS I II gallop
increase Rx 40 lasix 10 enalapril
Today.
review morning'
.
The corresponding computerised entry says:
'Congestive heart failure
increase rx 40 lasix 10 enal
Seen in own home
Dr H F Shipman'
.
These notes, taken together, suggest an exacerbation of congestive heart failure, which might have justified admission to hospital, particularly as Mr Russell was living alone. Instead, Shipman increased Mr Russell's diuretic and promised to see him the following day. The question must arise as to whether that entry is a genuine record of Mr Russell's condition that day or was fabricated as part of Shipman's concealment of his murder of Mr Russell. It could be either. Mrs Ann Russell, who is a nurse, says that she noticed her father-in-law's feet after his death and there was no sign of ankle oedema.
The next computerised entry reads:
'O/E - dead
1730 found by son
Death Certificate form Med A
chf arterioscl/pericarditis
Seen in own home
Dr H F Shipman
Congestive cardiac failure
pericardial constriction IHD'
.
Certification
Shipman subsequently completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). He noted that the approximate interval between the onset of the congestive heart failure and death was a period of six to nine months and that arteriosclerosis of
'12 months +'
in duration had led to the congestive heart failure. He certified that, although constrictive pericarditis and diabetes had contributed to death, they were not conditions related to the disease causing it. He said that he had seen Mr Russell on the day of his death.
Mr Russell was cremated and Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that the death had occurred at
'about 17.30'
on 2nd
July 1996. Shipman said that he had been the ordinary medical attendant of Mr Russell for two years (which was not accurate) and that he had attended Mr Russell for six weeks during his last illness. He said that he saw Mr Russell alive about three hours before death (which on his timing would mean that he had last seen him at about 2.30pm), and that he had made a complete external examination of the body about one and a half hours after death, which would be about 7pm. He did see the body at about 7pm, although Mr Neil Russell says that he did not examine it.
On Form B, Shipman stated that the mode of death was syncope of seconds' duration. In response to question 11, which asked whether his views as to the mode and cause of death were based on his own observations or statements made by others, Shipman wrote:
'own Found by son dead at the table. Seen by neighbour at 1500 hours'
.
There is no evidence of a neighbour seeing Mr Russell at 3pm. Mr Neil Russell told the Inquiry that, other than Mrs Hesford, no other neighbour would have visited his father, and she last saw him between midday and 1pm. Shipman wrote that no one was present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
In Dr Grenville's view, Mr Russell was at risk of sudden death from cardiac causes.
If Mr Russell was found dead soon after Shipman saw him, and if Shipman's medical note were genuine and accurate, it would have been reasonable for him to certify the cause of death as congestive heart failure. The position in which Mr Russell was found was consistent with death from congestive heart failure, as it is likely that Mr Russell would have wanted to be upright but might have wanted to rest his head on the table. On the other hand, his position was also consistent with death following the administration of a lethal dose of opiate while sitting at the kitchen table.
In Dr Grenville's view, if Mr Russell was in the condition as recorded by Shipman during the afternoon of 2nd
July 1996, it is unlikely that Mrs Hesford would have thought that he was well two to three hours earlier. If he was in the condition described by Shipman, it might have been appropriate to re-admit him to hospital.
Dr Grenville observed that it would not have been possible for Shipman to assess the time of death as 5.30pm if he had left Mr Russell alive at 2.30pm and returned at 7pm.
Professor Richard Baker has classified this death as highly suspicious on account of the contents of both the cremation documentation and the medical notes and records.
Conclusion
There are several suspicious features surrounding this death.
Mr Russell was found dead probably a little over four hours after Shipman had visited him. If Mrs Hesford's evidence is accurate, it appears that Shipman was the last person to see or speak to Mr Russell before his death. That, in itself, is a highly suspicious factor.
Although Mr Russell faced an increased risk of suffering a sudden cardiac death and had recently suffered an exacerbation of his congestive heart failure, there is evidence that, on the day of his death, he was in a reasonably good state. That does not mean that he could not die suddenly from heart failure. It is not clear why Shipman was called out on the morning of Mr Russell's death. It is unlikely that Nurse Gilchrist was very worried about his condition because she would probably have noted her concern if she had been. Mrs Hesford's recollection is that Mr Russell seemed well. If there was no real cause for concern and if Mr Russell seemed well on the morning of the day he died, it is quite possible that Shipman's medical note of his visit is not authentic. As Mrs Ann Russell noted that Mr Russell's feet and ankles were not swollen after death, it seems likely that the medical note describing severe ankle oedema and other signs of congestive heart failure is false. If Mr Russell was as ill as the note suggests, one might have expected Shipman to arrange, or at least suggest, re-admission to hospital. If it is false, the only real reason why Shipman would have made it up, is that he knew that he had killed Mr Russell and that he wanted to bolster the evidence in favour of a death resulting from natural causes.
Shipman's claim that he was able to state the time of death with accuracy was spurious. When that spurious claim is taken together with the claim (which is almost certainly false) that Mr Russell was seen alive at 3pm, one sees that Shipman has put forward a false account designed to distance himself from the death and to create the impression that he could not have been involved in it.
I have come to the conclusion that Shipman must have killed Mr Russell. It seems to me that the medical record for the day gives a false account of Mr Russell's condition. Although Mr Russell was suffering from congestive heart failure, and a sudden death from an exacerbation of that condition was possible, I am satisfied that Mr Russell did not suffer such an exacerbation on that day. Shipman's lies on Form B indicate that he wished to distance himself from involvement in the death. I am sure that Shipman killed him by administering a lethal injection of opiate.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001