The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Konrad Peter Ovcar-Robinson
Introduction
Mr Konrad Peter Ovcar-Robinson died at his home on Saturday, 25th
November 1995 at the age of 43. He had been a patient of Shipman since June 1995. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Ovcar-Robinson's death was bronchopneumonia due to Human Immuno Deficiency Syndrome.
In October 1998, Mr Ovcar-Robinson's partner, Mr Paul Charles McHugh, contacted the police and explained the circumstances surrounding the death, about which he was concerned. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr McHugh, and from Mr Ovcar-Robinson's two sisters. The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Ovcar-Robinson but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Ovcar-Robinson's two sisters and from District Nurse Karen Linda Goulding and District Nurse Barbara Sunderland. The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Ovcar-Robinson's general practitioner records, and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The community nursing records were also obtained. The Inquiry has also obtained two reports from Dr Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Ovcar-Robinson lived with Mr McHugh. His parents and sisters lived in the south of England.
In October 1994, Mr Ovcar-Robinson was diagnosed as HIV positive. The doctor treating him at the Monsall Ward at North Manchester General Hospital said that he had a life expectancy of between 12 and 18 months. He remained reasonably well until the summer of 1995, after which time his health deteriorated rapidly. In July 1995, he was referred to the local community nursing services for nursing care. In that month he also took a holiday in Gran Canaria, where he contracted gastroenteritis. He was admitted to hospital for a short time on his return.
Mr Ovcar-Robinson was then cared for at home save for two admissions to hospital. The first was for only about three days in early October. The second appears to have been for a longer period spanning late October and early November. His sisters recall visiting him in hospital at this time, although they do not agree on the date of the visit. They agree that they found that their brother had lost weight and was very tired and unwell. He was discharged in mid-November and was cared for at home by his parents and partner.
A nursing assessment carried out on 15th
November noted that Mr Ovcar-Robinson's recent admission to hospital had been due to septicaemia and pancytopenia (a decrease in the numbers of red cells, white cells and platelets in the blood) for which he had had two blood transfusions. It was noted that a particular need for care would arise following Mr McHugh's return to work on Monday, 20th
November 1995. Mr Ovcar-Robinson was noted to be unable to stand unaided and required assistance to be moved from a bed to a chair. He was short of breath. The notes record that nurses attended each day from 20th
November until the day of death.
Mr Ovcar-Robinson's mother returned to her home in Buckinghamshire on 23rd
or 24th
November for the weekend. A nursing note made on 24th
November records that Mr Ovcar-Robinson had commenced on oral morphine but had refused to take it. The next note records that Dr E M Dunbar (the doctor responsible for his care at North Manchester General Hospital) preferred Mr Ovcar-Robinson to take another drug. It appears that Mr Ovcar-Robinson had not taken morphine or diamorphine prior to the day of his death.
The Day of the Death
Mr McHugh told the police that Mr Ovcar-Robinson was very ill during the night of 24th
November and, on the morning of 25th
November, he had severe breathing difficulties. His eyes were rolling and he was unable to communicate. He was in bed in a first floor bedroom. Mr McHugh telephoned Shipman's surgery at about 10am and requested a visit. Mr Ovcar-Robinson's name appears in Shipman's visits book for that day with the following note:
'Deteriorated/Breathing heavy'
.
Mr McHugh said that Mr Ovcar-Robinson did
not
see Shipman from the time that he registered with him until the day of his death. In fact, Mr Ovcar-Robinson's name appears in Shipman's visits book on Monday, 20th
November and there is a corresponding entry in the computerised medical notes which records that Mr Ovcar-Robinson was
'very poorly'
. Although there is a record in the computerised notes that Mr Ovcar-Robinson attended the surgery on two occasions, his name does not appear in the appointments sheets for those dates. It seems likely, therefore, that Shipman saw Mr Ovcar-Robinson on 20th
November but not on any other day prior to the day of death.
On 25th
November 1995, Shipman arrived at the house at about 11am.
Mr Ovcar-Robinson's two sisters travelled up to Hyde that day. The visit was pre-arranged and they were not visiting as a response to the deterioration in Mr Ovcar-Robinson's condition. They telephoned when they arrived at Stockport station and Mr McHugh said that they should hurry to the house as the doctor was there and had said that Mr Ovcar-Robinson was very unwell.
In their evidence to the Inquiry, Mr Ovcar-Robinson's sisters said that he appeared to have lost a great deal of weight. His face was hollow and his lips were blue. He was unconscious and his breathing was noisy.
It appears that, at some stage, a district nurse was present in the house, although accounts differ as to precisely when the district nurse was there. Nurse Sunderland says that she visited three times on the day of Mr Ovcar-Robinson's death. She cannot remember the first occasion; the second was either just before or just after Mr Ovcar-Robinson had died; and the third was after the death, when she returned to collect some equipment.
When the family (but no nurses) was present, an important conversation took place between Shipman, Mr McHugh, and Mr Ovcar-Robinson's two sisters. Shipman was asked whether an ambulance should be called to take Mr Ovcar-Robinson to hospital. Shipman replied that taking Mr Ovcar-Robinson to hospital would only cause him unnecessary distress and said that Mr Ovcar-Robinson had previously told him that, once he had become unconscious, he did not wish to be resuscitated. Although both sisters were aware of their brother's desire to die at home, they were unaware of that specific instruction.
In her statement to the Inquiry, one of Mr Ovcar-Robinson's sisters has said that Shipman then said words to the effect that he could make Mr Ovcar-Robinson more comfortable and give him something to help him on his way. Shipman said that
'he would not come round again'
and warned that he could have a very prolonged death.
She has said that those present agreed that Shipman should do what he could to make Mr Ovcar-Robinson comfortable. Shipman apparently said:
'Right. We're agreed. I will give him an injection'
.
She remembers him going upstairs holding a black bag.
He then came downstairs and said that 'it would not take very long'. She remembers that, after Shipman had left, she went to see her brother and remembers that his lips were blue and his breathing had changed: it had become quieter. She says that, after a short while, he took a deep breath and then stopped breathing.
Mr Ovcar-Robinson's other sister remembers events slightly differently. She remembers Shipman saying that if Mr Ovcar-Robinson was allowed to
'die
naturally
it could take a matter of hours or perhaps it would be days'
. She said that he went on to say that he could give Mr Ovcar-Robinson an injection to
'make him more comfortable and to help him on his way'
.
She says in her Inquiry statement that, after the discussion and before Shipman administered an injection, each of those present went to see Mr Ovcar-Robinson separately. She has said that, when she went to see her brother, he mumbled to her but she is not sure whether he could hear what she was saying. She says that her sister and then Mr McHugh went to see him. Shipman then produced an ampoule from his jacket pocket and went upstairs to give an injection.
In her statement to the police, she said that Mr Ovcar-Robinson died
within an hour
of Shipman having administered the injection. In her statement to the Inquiry, she said that her brother died about
half an hour
after Shipman had left.
Shipman returned to the house within an hour of his earlier departure, and both sisters recall that he was 'a very different person'. He was abrupt and extremely insensitive and he was particularly rude to Mr McHugh. He telephoned for an undertaker and talked about Mr Ovcar-Robinson in an insensitive way, in stark contrast to his earlier, sympathetic approach.
There are three entries in the computerised medical records for 25th
November 1995:
'Terminal care
10mg heroin
Had a chat to patient
Relatives
O/E - dead
1325 bronchopneumonia hiv'
.
These suggest that Shipman had administered 10mg of diamorphine, or heroin, as part of the terminal care regime. They also suggest that Shipman spoke to Mr Ovcar-Robinson about the administration of the drug, although the witness evidence suggests that Mr Ovcar-Robinson was almost completely unconscious when Shipman arrived that day. The note does not say how the injection was administered. I have grave doubts as to whether the stated amount of the dose was accurate.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), which he dated 25th
November 1995. He said that he had last seen Mr Ovcar-Robinson alive on 25th
November 1995, that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that he had seen the body after death. He certified that the cause of death was bronchopneumonia due to Human Immuno Deficiency Syndrome. He said that the approximate interval between the onset of the bronchopneumonia and death was four to five days and that the approximate interval between the onset of the Human Immuno Deficiency Syndrome and death was two years.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered Mr Ovcar-Robinson's medical records and concluded that the death was moderately suspicious and that the possibility of euthanasia should be borne in mind.
In his statement to the police, Dr Grenville noted the history and the circumstances leading up to the death as set out in the police witness statements. On the basis of the witness evidence, Dr Grenville concluded that Mr Ovcar-Robinson was terminally ill and distressed. He said that, in those circumstances, it was entirely appropriate for diamorphine to be given by injection, either intravenously or intramuscularly. He said that the dose of 10mg would be appropriate. He said that an
'unintended'
secondary effect would be to depress his respiration, which might hasten his death. He said that it has been ruled by the General Medical Council that, if in the doctor's clinical opinion it is necessary to run the risk of shortening the patient's life in order to relieve distress, it is good practice to give drugs such as morphine or diamorphine where the patient is terminally ill and in imminent danger of death in any case.
In his first statement to the Inquiry, Dr Grenville added that patients with AIDS can develop illnesses with startling rapidity and it is entirely possible that Mr Ovcar-Robinson developed pneumonia overnight, which was sufficient to kill him by the morning. He again observed that Mr Ovcar-Robinson was distressed and in some pain and said that, in those circumstances, an injection of morphine or diamorphine would be appropriate, and, although it might
hasten
death by a few minutes by depressing respiration, it might also
delay
death by a few minutes by causing the patient to become calm. Dr Grenville said that, in his opinion, Shipman had acted appropriately. When he made that statement, Dr Grenville did not have the Inquiry statements of Mr Ovcar-Robinson's two sisters or the two district nurses. Dr Grenville's second statement to the Inquiry, for which he did have those statements, reflects the fact that the final judgment in the case must turn on what can be inferred from all the circumstances as having been Shipman's intention in administering the injection that he undoubtedly gave. He recognises that Mr Ovcar-Robinson was probably unconscious and not in pain or distressed, although it might have been appropriate to give an opiate in anticipation of the onset of pain following a recovery of consciousness. If Shipman intended to give a lethal dose of diamorphine so that Mr Ovcar-Robinson died rapidly, Dr Grenville would regard this as a case of euthanasia, which is, of course, illegal.
Conclusion
There is no doubt that Mr Ovcar-Robinson was terminally ill. His condition deteriorated in the days leading up to his death, particularly on the night of 24th
November. When Shipman arrived at the house, Mr Ovcar-Robinson's breathing was noisy and he almost certainly had some form of pneumonia or bronchopneumonia. If he was in pain or distressed, or if Shipman genuinely believed that his pain might return with a recovery of consciousness, Shipman would be justified in giving him an opiate drug.
Shipman's intention in administering that opiate can be determined by reference to the dose administered and what he said to the family. It appears to me, from the reported conversations, that he probably intended to ensure that Mr Ovcar-Robinson would die that afternoon. In order to achieve that end, he would need quite a large dose of diamorphine, although Mr Ovcar-Robinson was already in a very debilitated state. In his evidence to the Inquiry, Professor Henry McQuay said that 30mg of intravenous diamorphine is likely to prove fatal to a fit adult not previously exposed to strong opioid drugs. He said that 20mg could prove fatal to an elderly, unfit and opioid naïve person. I think that 20mg would certainly have been enough to kill Mr Ovcar-Robinson. It is possible that even 10mg might have done, if he was sufficiently debilitated. However, I think it likely that Shipman would have wished to record a justifiable dose, even though he might well have given considerably more.
I am by no means convinced that the dose was necessarily limited to 10mg of diamorphine. At this time in 1995, Shipman had in his possession a large quantity of diamorphine, mainly in 100mg ampoules. He had almost certainly obtained ten ampoules of 100mg diamorphine on 23rd
September 1995, following the death of Mr Peter Neal, who had had the use of a syringe driver for pain relief in the last few days of his life. It is not impossible that Shipman also had some 10mg ampoules in November 1995, but I think his main stock was in 100mg ampoules. He might also have had some 30mg ampoules. One of Mr Ovcar-Robinson's sisters recalls seeing Shipman take an ampoule from his pocket. It is not impossible that he gave Mr Ovcar-Robinson precisely 10mg but I regard it as more likely that he administered a larger dose than that. I also think it quite likely that the dose was not a whole ampoule and was not therefore precisely measured. I think it likely that the dose was administered intramuscularly, rather than intravenously. Death followed within about 30 to 60 minutes after the injection was given. As Professor McQuay said, that is entirely typical of the effect of a lethal dose given intramuscularly.
My conclusion is that it is likely that Shipman deliberately and unlawfully hastened Mr Ovcar-Robinson's death. I cannot say that I am certain of that conclusion, as it is possible that the dose was of only 10mg and was given lawfully, with the intention only of relieving pain or distress.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001