The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Jane Frances Rostron
Introduction
Mrs Jane Frances Rostron (known as Frances) died at her home, 5A Hamel Street, Hyde on Friday, 8th
May 1987 at the age of 78. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
In November 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mrs Eunice Brenda Harper (Mrs Rostron's daughter) expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her mother's death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Harper. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Harper.
The Inquiry has also had access to the cremation forms, the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book and Shipman's visits book for 1987. Mrs Rostron's medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Rostron lived alone in a flat on Hamel Street. She was in close contact with her daughter and, as a matter of routine, Mrs Harper would visit her on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, as well as seeing her most weekends. Mrs Harper describes her mother as a healthy person despite having suffered a heart attack either in 1981 or 1983. The heart attack, which is described as 'mild', did not result in Mrs Rostron being admitted to hospital. She did take a number of types of tablet, although Mrs Harper cannot recall what these were for, except that one type was a 'water tablet', in other words a diuretic. Some diuretics, such as bendrofluazide, are routinely prescribed to control hypertension. Mrs Harper does not know whether or not her mother had hypertension, although she does not believe that she ever suffered a stroke.
Mrs Harper last saw her mother alive on Wednesday, 6th
May, two days before she died. In her statement to the Inquiry she describes her mother as 'her usual self'. However, in her statement to the police, Mrs Harper said, 'I thought she was ill at the time, but there again, she would play-act up to me to get her own way. I knew she was stubborn and bossy at times'. If Mrs Rostron was feeling unwell on the Wednesday, either she was not seriously unwell or her condition improved because she went shopping in Hyde on the Thursday, taking a bus each way.
The Day of the Death
On Friday, 8th
May, Mrs Harper spent the morning shopping in Ashton. She called at her mother's house at about 3pm. There was no answer at the door and she let herself into the house using a key. She found her mother lying on the settee, wearing her nightclothes and covered by a duvet. Although she looked peaceful, Mrs Harper knew immediately that she had died. In her statement to the police, Mrs Harper said that her mother's hands were on top of the duvet.
As there was no telephone in her mother's house, Mrs Harper went to a neighbour's house to telephone the Donneybrook Surgery. She told the receptionist that her mother had died and was told that a doctor would attend shortly. Mrs Harper then returned to her mother's house to wait for the doctor to arrive. The son of Mrs June Stamp, another neighbour, called round to see if Mrs Rostron required any prescriptions or shopping picking up. Mrs Harper said that there was no need, but she did not explain what had happened. Mrs Harper noticed in the kitchen that her mother's breakfast plate had not been washed up as would normally be the case by lunchtime.
Shipman arrived at around 4pm, glanced briefly at Mrs Rostron and then confirmed that she had died. He did not perform any kind of examination. He said that he had called at the house earlier that day between 11.45am and midday, when he had diagnosed that Mrs Rostron had suffered 'a slight stroke in her left arm'. Shipman said that he had asked Mrs Rostron to go to hospital but that she had refused. In her statement to the police, Mrs Harper said that she could well imagine her mother having refused to go to hospital. Shipman said that he had therefore issued a prescription which Mrs Harper then saw was still sitting on the sideboard. Mrs Harper recalls that the prescription contained a good deal of writing and certainly referred to more than one type of medication. Mrs Harper expressed surprise at the fact that Shipman had visited her mother. At that point, Mrs Stamp came in to the kitchen and said that it was she who had telephoned the surgery on Mrs Rostron's behalf as she had said that she was not feeling too well. Mrs Stamp has since died and the Inquiry was unable to take a statement from her prior to her death. Mrs Harper recalls that Shipman was kind and sympathetic in manner and recommended a firm of undertakers. Mrs Harper said to Shipman that she regretted not having called in at the house at midday. Shipman replied that, if Mrs Rostron had gone into hospital, then she might still be alive.
Mrs Harper says that it was her mother's practice to stay in bed when she was unwell and she never wore her nightclothes during the day unless she was in bed. Therefore, it was unusual in itself that Mrs Rostron was found lying on the settee, covered by a duvet.
Mrs Rostron's name appears in the visits book for 8th
May and Shipman recorded an intention to visit her again the following day. However, there are no visits recorded in Shipman's visits book for 9th
May and the word
'off'
appears. As Shipman was apparently not working on the Saturday, he personally could not have visited Mrs Rostron the following day. It is quite possible that he noted an intention to revisit knowing that it would not be necessary.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and although the certificate itself has not been recovered, the counterfoil is available to the Inquiry. There, it is recorded that Shipman last saw Mrs Rostron alive on the day of her death, that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that he had seen the body after death.
Mrs Rostron was cremated on 14th
May 1987 and Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. The date of death is recorded as 8th
March
1987. All the available evidence, including the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), points to the death having occurred on 8th
May 1987, and the entry on the cremation certificate is clearly an error. The death is said to have occurred at
'about 14.00hrs'
. Shipman said that he had been Mrs Rostron's ordinary medical attendant for nine years and had attended her for two hours during her last illness. He said he had last seen Mrs Rostron alive two hours before death and had seen her body about two hours after death, at which time he carried out a complete external examination. The mode of death was said to be collapse of minutes only in duration. Shipman recorded that his answers as to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and that nobody was present at the moment of Mrs Rostron's death. In response to question 17 (as to whether there was any reason to suppose that a further examination of the body would be desirable), Shipman made the following entry:
'No. Seen at about 12 midday. Found by relative at 16.20 hrs dead'
. The times recorded on Form B have been amended and overwritten. It is not possible to decipher what times were originally recorded in each case, although it appears that Shipman originally recorded having attended during the last illness of three hours' duration and having last seen Mrs Rostron alive three hours before death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered the cremation certificate and concluded that the death of Mrs Rostron was highly suspicious.
Conclusion
There are several suspicious features surrounding this death. The strongest evidence that Shipman killed Mrs Rostron is the temporal link between his visit and her death. He visited at about noon, no one saw her alive thereafter and he certified on Form B that she died at 2pm. That, in itself, is a factor which gives rise to grave suspicion that Shipman was responsible for the death.
Mrs Rostron probably suffered from some degree of hypertension and there is a real possibility that she was at risk of suffering a stroke. Although she had eaten breakfast on the morning of her death, she was certainly unwell and had requested a visit from Shipman. She had not dressed that morning, which tends to confirm that she was unwell. Mrs Harper recalls that Shipman told her that, when he visited that day, Mrs Rostron had suffered a slight stroke in her left arm. It sounds as though he was describing an occlusive stroke affecting the left side of the body. It is entirely possible that Mrs Rostron had had or was having a stroke that morning, although her illness could have been something entirely different. However, the question is not so much whether she had a stroke as whether or not she died of a stroke. As Dr John Grenville has explained in his generic evidence, the occlusive strokes that cause one-sided weakness originate in the upper part of the brain and do not usually result in sudden death. Usually the outcome is survival, with or without permanent damage. If the stroke is to be fatal, death will occur following a substantial period of gradual deterioration, usually lasting something of the order of two to three days. The type of stroke that can cause sudden death occurs in the brain stem and does not give rise to one-sided weakness. Dr Grenville says that it is extremely unlikely that a patient would suffer two different types of stroke within a few hours. In my view, Mrs Rostron died too quickly for her death to be plausibly attributable to the development of a left-sided stroke earlier in the day. She might well have had a stroke but I think it unlikely that she died as the result of it.
Shipman claimed that Mrs Rostron refused to be admitted to hospital. Shipman quite often said this of patients who he had recently killed. In some cases, he would also blame the death on the patient's refusal to be admitted. Those features in the present case give rise to some suspicion. Although Mrs Harper found it credible that her mother would refuse to go to hospital, Shipman did not claim to have made any attempt to contact a relative who might persuade her to do so. More important is the question of why Shipman did not make any attempt to arrange for Mrs Rostron to be looked after. If Mrs Rostron had indeed suffered a stroke, it might not have been imperative for her to be admitted to hospital. But it was absolutely necessary that she should not be left alone. Her stroke might have developed and her condition worsened. Had Shipman attempted to contact Mrs Harper, from midday he would have found her at home. Alternatively, Shipman could have sought the assistance of Mrs Stamp, the neighbour who had telephoned the surgery on Mrs Rostron's behalf that morning.
Instead of arranging care, Shipman simply issued a prescription. The range of medication available for the treatment of a stroke is limited. If Mrs Rostron's blood pressure was dangerously high, then it might have been appropriate to prescribe medication to reduce her blood pressure. However, if that were the case, then again Shipman should have contacted a relative or neighbour to collect the medication urgently and not simply have left the prescription on the sideboard. It seems likely that the prescription was part of the device used by Shipman to substantiate symptoms compatible with the certified cause of death. It is likely that the same device was used in the medical records for that day, although these are not available now.
Shipman recorded an intention to revisit Mrs Rostron the next day. As I have already observed, he was not working the following day. Although it is possible that Shipman might have intended that one of his partners should visit Mrs Rostron the next day, it is at least equally likely that he made the entry knowing that a visit would not be necessary.
Mrs Rostron's peaceful appearance in death is consistent with the appearance of many of Shipman's victims who are known to have been killed by the administration of a lethal injection of diamorphine.
Shipman did not perform any examination of Mrs Rostron's body. In his generic evidence, Dr Grenville outlined six steps that should be taken to establish the fact of death. Shipman apparently did not perform any of these steps and is described by Mrs Harper as simply having 'glanced' at her mother before confirming the fact of death. Although it is known that Shipman did not examine deceased patients thoroughly even in cases where the death was not suspicious (and thus no great reliance should therefore be placed on the point), one explanation for Shipman being able to announce the fact of death without examining the body would be that he had killed Mrs Rostron during his earlier visit.
Taking the evidence as a whole, I am driven to the conclusion that Shipman killed Mrs Rostron. This case has Shipman's hallmark on it. Notwithstanding the absence of the medical records, I feel able to be sure of my conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001