The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The First Report
>
Alphabetical List of Cases
>
Gladys Roberts
Introduction
Mrs Gladys Roberts died at her home, 25 Shaw Hall Avenue, Hyde on Wednesday, 8th
February 1984 at the age of 78. She had lived alone since she was widowed in 1977. She had been a patient of Shipman for a number of years. He certified that the cause of her death was pulmonary embolus due to right deep vein thrombosis.
On 24th
August 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mr Graham Stanley Roberts, the son of Mrs Roberts, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of his mother's death. The police investigated the death, although they did not take any statements.
An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Roberts and his wife, Mrs Enid Roberts. Mrs Roberts' medical records have not survived, but the Inquiry has obtained the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book and Shipman's visits books for 1983 and 1984. The Inquiry has also had access to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), and the cremation certificate.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Some time after the death of her husband, Mrs Roberts was diagnosed as suffering from nocturnal asthma. It appears that she was otherwise well until about 12 months before her death, when she developed an ulcer on her right leg. This did not affect her mobility but the practice nurse from the Donneybrook Surgery regularly visited her at home to dress the affected area. It is reasonable to infer from the fact that she had an ulcer that she also had general problems with the circulation in her legs. Also, in the month or so leading up to her death, Mrs Roberts began to show signs of confusion. She had no other problems, however, and Mr Roberts feels certain that his mother would have told him if she were under treatment from her doctor. In the three month period before her death, Mrs Roberts' name appears only twice in Shipman's visits books. Both entries appear to suggest that Shipman was trying to enlist some assistance for Mrs Roberts, probably in connection with her ulcer. On 19th
December, there is what seems to be a reference to a health visitor and, on 23rd
December, there is reference to a district nurse. It is reasonable to infer, from the absence of frequent references to Mrs Roberts in the visits books, that she was not suffering from a chronic illness which required frequent attention.
Mr Roberts last saw his mother on 5th
February 1984, when she was well.
The Day of the Death
At about 12.40pm on 8th
February 1984, Mrs Roberts telephoned her daughter-in-law. She said that the practice nurse had visited her and had dressed the ulcer on her leg. She also said that the nurse thought she might benefit from hospital treatment and that she would ask the doctor to visit later that day. Mrs Roberts said that there was no need for her daughter-in-law to visit and that she would telephone her when the doctor had gone. She also mentioned that her neighbour, Mrs Nora Ashton, would be collecting her pension for her.
Shipman's visits book shows that Mrs Roberts was the third of six patients whom he intended to visit that day.
By 3.40pm, Mrs Enid Roberts had not heard from her mother-in-law. She decided to telephone to check that all was well but, just as she was about to do so, the telephone rang. It was Shipman, who introduced himself and asked Mrs Roberts to confirm who she was. Shipman then asked her whether she was sitting down, before informing her that her mother-in-law had died. Shipman explained that he had visited Mrs Roberts and that, whilst he was on the telephone to the hospital, Mrs Roberts gave one cough. He turned around and saw that she had died. He said that the cause was a pulmonary embolism. He did not offer any words of comfort or regret. He said that he would have to call the police and asked Mrs Roberts whether she could stay with the body until the police arrived. When Mrs Roberts said that it would take her about 20 minutes to reach the house, Shipman said, 'I can't wait that long - I will have a word with the police and call you back in a couple of minutes'.
A minute or so later, Shipman telephoned Mrs Enid Roberts again. Even at the time, Mrs Roberts doubted whether he had had enough time to speak to the police. Shipman told her that the police had said that there was no need for them to be involved. He said that he had to leave for his evening surgery and that, when Mrs Roberts arrived, she would find her mother-in-law's arm out of the sleeve of her dress. He said that this was because he had tried to resuscitate her. He also said that he had moved Mrs Roberts, from the chair in which she was sitting when she had died, to the settee. Mrs Roberts was upset by the unsympathetic way in which Shipman delivered the news of her mother-in-law's death.
Mrs Enid Roberts telephoned her husband at work and told him the news. Together, they went to Mrs Roberts' house. They found her body on the settee. Her head was on the arm of the settee. She looked peaceful and her face was quite serene. She was wearing a short-sleeved dress. This was open at the back and had been pulled down so that her right arm was out of the sleeve and was hanging over the side of the settee. Mr Roberts recalls feeling angry that his mother had been left in this way. Mrs Enid Roberts put the arm back into the sleeve of the dress. Mrs Roberts' eyes were closed but her glasses were still on. This struck Mr and Mrs Roberts as strange, because they thought that, if Shipman had tried to resuscitate Mrs Roberts, he would have removed her glasses. So far as Mrs Enid Roberts can remember, the bandage on her mother-in-law's leg had not been disturbed.
The Aftermath
The following day, Mr and Mrs Roberts attended the Donneybrook Surgery and spoke to Shipman. He threw the MCCD across the desk and said, 'This is how we all end up - just a piece of paper'. His manner was brusque. Shipman said again that he had heard a cough and that when he had turned around Mrs Roberts was purple. Shipman explained that he had then tried, unsuccessfully, to resuscitate her.
After the death, Mrs Roberts visited Mrs Ashton, who had collected Mrs Roberts' pension for her on the morning of the day she died. Mrs Ashton said that, after she had delivered her pension to her, Mrs Roberts had waved her off at the front door with her cat under one arm. Mrs Ashton said that she seemed well and added that, if she had thought there was anything wrong with Mrs Roberts, she would not have left her alone.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. The counterfoil shows that he said that the cause of death was a pulmonary embolus due to a right deep vein thrombosis. He said that chronic bronchitis and ischaemic heart disease had contributed to the death but were not related to the immediate cause of death. He said he had seen Mrs Roberts alive on the day of her death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that death had occurred at
'1600 hrs'
on 8th
February 1984. He said that he had attended Mrs Roberts during her last illness for a period of 12 hours. It is hard to imagine that he can have meant that, as the answer implies that he had seen Mrs Roberts at about 4am that day. He said that he last saw Mrs Roberts alive
'within 10-15 minutes'
before her death. He said that he was present at the moment of death and made a complete external examination of the body immediately afterwards. He gave the immediate cause of death as on the MCCD. He said that the mode of death was syncope of
'a few minutes'
duration. When asked whether his opinions on the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or statements made by others, Shipman wrote:
'own. Saw patient at home diagnosis
made - arranged admission to
hospital
ambulance - patient dead
when went back to see her - ie
within 10 minutes'
.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker found the case highly suspicious, on account of the contents of the cremation forms.
Conclusion
There are a number of suspicious features surrounding this death.
Although her medical records are unavailable, the witness evidence suggests that, apart from her ulcerated leg, Mrs Roberts was in reasonably good health. On the morning of her death, Mrs Ashton thought that she looked well. The nurse who attended to dress Mrs Roberts' leg thought that a visit by Shipman was needed to assess whether Mrs Roberts might benefit from hospital treatment. We do not know why the nurse formed this view. There are many possibilities. One is that the ulcer was not healing as rapidly as it should. It might have become infected. It is possible that the nurse thought that Mrs Roberts might have a deep vein thrombosis. As Dr John Grenville explained when giving evidence to the Inquiry in the case of Mrs Elizabeth Battersby, it can sometimes be difficult to diagnose a deep vein thrombosis in an ulcerated leg. The presence of the ulcer creates an increased risk of deep vein thrombosis. The nurse would know that, if Mrs Roberts had a deep vein thrombosis, she ought to be admitted to hospital, as an emergency, as she was at risk of suffering a pulmonary embolism. However, it seems unlikely that the nurse thought Mrs Roberts was acutely ill, otherwise she would almost certainly have called an ambulance. It does not appear that Mrs Roberts thought that she might be admitted to hospital that day, rather that she might be referred to the hospital. I think it doubtful that the nurse thought that there was a deep vein thrombosis, although it is possible that she did. I am quite sure that Mrs Roberts was not at that stage suffering from a pulmonary embolism.
It must be accepted that there is a possibility that Mrs Roberts had a deep vein thrombosis in her right leg. If so, she was at risk of suffering a pulmonary embolism. However, most pulmonary emboli do not result in death. Only a very large embolus will kill. Before a large embolus breaks off, one would expect the leg with the deep vein thrombosis to be very swollen, hot and painful. One might have expected Mrs Roberts to have noticed such symptoms for herself and mentioned them to her family. I conclude that, even though it is possible that Mrs Roberts might have been developing a deep vein thrombosis, this was unlikely to have been of the severity usually necessary to cause a sudden death by pulmonary embolus.
Shipman's account of the death is frankly unbelievable. First, there is the remarkable coincidence that the death occurred during the few minutes that Shipman was in Mrs Roberts' house. That in itself is an extraordinary coincidence and I find it hard to believe that Mrs Roberts' embolus (if she had one) could have chosen the very moment of Shipman's presence to reach her lungs and kill her. In any event, death by pulmonary embolism is a very painful and frightening event. If the embolus is large enough to be fatal, it will have blocked the flow of blood to the lungs. The patient will be gasping for breath. If Mrs Roberts died in those circumstances, she would be unlikely to look peaceful in death.
Shipman claimed that Mrs Roberts simply coughed and died. That would not be typical of a death by pulmonary embolus. I could understand that a doctor might wish to understate the pain and distress suffered when describing the death to relatives. I note that Shipman did not give this extraordinary account when completing Form B. His medical colleagues would surely have known it was false. To them, he said that he found Mrs Roberts dead when he returned from making a telephone call to arrange admission to hospital. In fact, the telephone was in the living room where Mrs Roberts died.
If, as is entirely possible, Shipman was summoned because the nurse suspected that Mrs Roberts might have a deep vein thrombosis, I would have expected him to undo her bandage to examine her leg. It appears that he probably did not do so.
Mrs Roberts was found with her dress partly undone and her arm out of the sleeve. A possible explanation for that is that Shipman might have wished to examine the back of her chest with his stethoscope. It seems to me that that is a rather more plausible explanation for her state of partial undress than the explanation Shipman gave. I cannot think that it would help with resuscitation to take one arm out of a dress. There are other signs that resuscitation did not take place. It would be impossible to carry it out while Mrs Roberts' spectacles were on her nose. If Shipman did attempt resuscitation, he would need a firm surface and would have had to put Mrs Roberts on the floor. Why he would then wish to move her onto the settee and leave her as he did is hard to understand.
I am puzzled by Shipman's claim on Form B that he had attended Mrs Roberts during her last illness for a period of 12 hours. It is highly unlikely to be true, but is probably not a deliberate lie.
Mrs Roberts' peaceful appearance in death is not consistent with death caused by a pulmonary embolism, as Dr Grenville explained when he gave evidence in the case of Mrs Elizabeth Battersby on 13th
November 2001. However, it is wholly consistent with death by a lethal injection of opiates.
Taking all the factors together, I think I can safely rule out the possibility that Mrs Roberts really did die suddenly as the result of massive pulmonary embolism. I am driven to the conclusion that Shipman must have killed her. There is no reason to think that he used any other than his usual method, the administration of a lethal dose of strong opiate. I am sure of this conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001