The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Dorothy Rowarth
Introduction
Mrs Dorothy Rowarth died at her home, 30 Farm Lane, Hyde on Tuesday, 18th
September 1990 at the age of 56. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was ovarian carcinoma.
In September 2000, Mrs Rowarth's husband, Mr Dennis Tom Rowarth, contacted the police to express concern about his wife's death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mr Rowarth. Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Rowarth but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Rowarth, Miss Lynn Rowarth (Mr and Mrs Rowarth's daughter) and District Nurse Clegg. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Rowarth's computerised general practitioner records, Shipman's visits book for 1990 and Nurse Clegg's diary for the relevant period, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil and the cremation documentation. A report and a supplementary report have been obtained from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Rowarth says that his wife enjoyed good health until about a year before her death, when she began to suffer from pain in the back and abdomen. Shipman initially diagnosed a kidney problem but the medication he prescribed did not bring about any improvement. Eventually Mrs Rowarth was referred to Tameside General Hospital where it was found that she had ovarian cancer. It fell to Shipman to break this news to Mr and Mrs Rowarth and he did so in a compassionate way. In February 1990, he told them that the prognosis was very poor. The cancer was inoperable and Mrs Rowarth would probably only live until the end of the year.
Mrs Rowarth's computerised medical records confirm this history and show that Mrs Rowarth was treated with medication. Her condition deteriorated. In particular she was troubled by the accumulation of fluid and twice underwent drainage procedures at hospital. By late June 1990, Mrs Rowarth was in quite severe pain and was prescribed slow-release morphine tablets (MST). Initially she was to take two 10mg tablets each day. In July this was supplemented by Co-codamol. It appears from the computerised record of Mrs Rowarth's drug requirements that there is no note of any increase in her dose of MST after 14th
July. Dr Grenville says that it is likely that Mrs Rowarth would have needed increasing doses of analgesic and thinks it likely that in due course MST might have been inadequate. He infers that it is quite possible that Shipman prescribed injectable opiates but did not record that he had done so.
From early August, Nurse Clegg was a regular visitor. She noted that Mrs Rowarth was then taking 30mg of MST daily. Initially she came to give an enema, but from then on she visited in order to keep an eye on Mrs Rowarth and to support Mr Rowarth. She recalls that Mrs Rowarth was very ill.
Mr Rowarth recalls that by mid to early August 1990, Shipman was administering diamorphine, which he told Mr Rowarth was the same as morphine. There is no record of diamorphine or of any injectable opiate in Mrs Rowarth's computerised records. As Dr Grenville said, it is possible that records were kept on paper and not entered on the computer. Mr Rowarth told the police that Shipman provided a prescription for both morphine tablets and injectable morphine, but that although Mr Rowarth collected both types of medication from the chemist, neither was used because Shipman brought his own with him when he attended the house. He became a frequent visitor to the house, usually arriving between noon and 1pm. Mr Rowarth says that he was present on a number of occasions when Shipman gave his wife an injection in the upper arm.
From 3rd
September 1990, Mrs Rowarth was receiving daily visits from Nurse Clegg. She recalls that Mrs Rowarth required assistance with general hygiene, including washing, changing clothes and oral hygiene. Mrs Rowarth had severe oedema in the legs due to pressure on the lymph glands. By this time, Mrs Rowarth was confined to bed and was extremely ill. Nurse Clegg was not responsible for giving Mrs Rowarth injections for pain relief. She thinks that towards the end Mrs Rowarth may have been taking Oramorph, a liquid morphine preparation, and that it is likely that Shipman was giving morphine or diamorphine injections.
On about 16th
September 1990, Mr Rowarth telephoned Miss Rowarth, who was in Canada, and told her that she should return to England immediately because her mother was not expected to survive much longer.
Nurse Clegg last visited Mrs Rowarth on 17th
September 1990 but she cannot now recall anything in particular about that visit. It does not appear from her evidence, however, that she was surprised when Mrs Rowarth died the following day.
At some stage shortly before the death, Shipman gave Mr Rowarth his home telephone number and told him that if his wife was in pain, he should telephone him at home rather than ring for an emergency doctor. Shipman often did this for terminally ill patients.
Mrs Rowarth's name appears in Shipman's visits book for 3rd
, 5th
, 7th
, 11th
, 14th
and 17th
September and for the day of her death.
The Day of the Death
Mr Rowarth recalls that on the morning of 18th
September, his wife was able to get up and dress herself. He says that his wife even smoked two cigarettes and drank half a cup of coffee. He recalls that although his wife was in a 'poorly' condition, she was sitting in a chair and was fully conscious when Shipman arrived at about 2.30pm. This recollection of Mr Rowarth as to his wife's condition seems inconsistent with the evidence of Nurse Clegg as well as the evidence of Miss Rowarth.
Miss Rowarth, who arrived from Canada that afternoon and went immediately to her parents' house, saw her mother in her bedroom reclining in her chair. Mrs Rowarth was asleep and was wearing a nightdress and a housecoat. Mr Rowarth woke her up and asked her if she knew who Miss Rowarth was. Mrs Rowarth replied, 'Yes. It's Lynn'. Mrs Rowarth then drifted back to sleep.
Mr Rowarth told the police that both he and his daughter stayed with Mrs Rowarth during Shipman's visit. He said that he saw Shipman administer an injection to Mrs Rowarth into the very top of her right arm, as he had done on earlier occasions. Shipman then left and about 15 minutes later Mr Rowarth saw his wife slump unconscious in her chair. He called Shipman, who arrived after about 15 minutes and told Mr Rowarth that his wife was dead. He had with him a pad of certificates, one of which he completed and handed to Mr Rowarth.
In his Inquiry statement, Mr Rowarth says that he is not sure whether or not he was present throughout Shipman's visit on 18th
September. It would appear that this change in his recollection has come about following a discussion with his daughter. He does, however, maintain that his wife was conscious when Shipman arrived. He told the Inquiry that after Shipman left, he and his daughter went up to see Mrs Rowarth and found her in a semi-conscious state from which she never really 'came round'. He recalls that his wife was drifting in and out of consciousness and that at times she did not recognise him. He has told the Inquiry that he stayed with her until she 'just slumped' and he realised that she had died.
Miss Rowarth says that Shipman saw her mother alone whilst she and her father waited downstairs. She thinks that Shipman was with her mother for about 15 minutes. She recalls him saying, when he came downstairs, that he had given Mrs Rowarth an injection. Miss Rowarth recalls that after Shipman had left at about 2.50pm, she and her father went to see her mother. Her mother was still in her chair and appeared to be asleep, as before. Mr Rowarth nudged her to wake her, but she slumped forward and Miss Rowarth recalls her father saying, 'She's dead'.
Miss Rowarth recalls that her father telephoned the Donneybrook Surgery and Shipman returned to the house very quickly. He went up to the bedroom and asked Mr Rowarth and Miss Rowarth to leave the room. Miss Rowarth has the impression that he was upstairs for about 20 minutes. When he came downstairs he was smiling and cheerful, which Miss Rowarth found inappropriate so soon after the death.
Mr Rowarth remembers that after the death, Shipman told Mr Rowarth that he could probably have kept his wife alive for months but there was no point in doing so if she was going to spend her time in bed on a drip.
Both Mr Rowarth and his daughter recall that Shipman did not remove any drugs from the house after the death. Mr Rowarth took them to a pharmacy for destruction.
The computerised medical records confirm the general history and contain the following entries for 18th
September 1990:
'CARCINOMA OVARY
DEATH
TERMINAL ILLNESS
OFF ALL DRUGS'
.
Certification
The MCCD itself has not survived but its counterfoil has been found. Shipman stated that Mrs Rowarth died of ovarian cancer on 18th
September 1990. He said that he had last seen her alive on the day of her death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He gave the time of death as 3pm. He said that he had attended Mrs Rowarth for nine months during her last illness. He had last seen her about five minutes before her death. He said that he had examined her body about half an hour after death. He claimed that the mode of death was a coma lasting four to six hours. His answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations. He noted that Mrs Rowarth had undergone a laparotomy in December 1989. He recorded that Mrs Rowarth's husband and Nurse Clegg had nursed Mrs Rowarth during her last illness. Mr Rowarth and Miss Rowarth were said to have been present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker examined the cremation documents but did not consider the death to be suspicious.
Dr Grenville says that it appears that Mrs Rowarth was very ill and that she probably required diamorphine for pain relief. The dose would probably have been increased as the days went by. In his opinion, if Mrs Rowarth had complained to Shipman of severe pain on the day that she died, it would have been appropriate for him to give her a dose of diamorphine. This might have caused some suppression of respiration, as an unintended side effect and could have hastened her death. Alternatively, in Dr Grenville's view, it is possible that Shipman gave Mrs Rowarth a dose of diamorphine which was higher than that required to relieve her pain. He might in that way have deliberately hastened her death by a matter of hours, days or possibly up to a week or two. As Dr Grenville did not know what dose had been given or what Mrs Rowarth's pain-relieving regime had previously been, he could not express a firm view.
Conclusion
It appears highly likely that Mrs Rowarth died very shortly after an opiate injection given by Shipman. I say that because both Mr Rowarth and Miss Rowarth say that Shipman gave an injection at the last visit and Shipman himself said that the death occurred within five minutes of him last seeing Mrs Rowarth alive. As the death occurred so soon after the injection, I infer that it is likely that there was a causal connection between the injection and the death. It does not follow that Shipman deliberately gave a lethal dose of opiate. He might have made a genuine assessment of Mrs Rowarth's needs and given the injection in good faith; it could be that the hastening of the death was the unintended effect of a dose intended only to relieve pain. With any other doctor, I would assume that that was the case. However, I know that Shipman frequently used diamorphine to kill healthy patients and I have also found that he sometimes gave an excessive amount with a view to hastening the death of a terminally ill patient.
In those circumstances, I think it most likely that Shipman deliberately gave an excessive dose of opiate. My conclusion is that Shipman probably hastened Mrs Rowarth's death. However, I stress that her death was imminent and he cannot have shortened her life by very long.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001