The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Jose Kathleen Diana Richards
Introduction
Mrs José Kathleen Diana Richards died at her home, 32 Meadowfield Court, Flowery Field, Hyde on Thursday, 22nd
July 1993 at the age of 74. She had been a patient of Shipman since 1990, when she moved to Hyde from North Wales, and she followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought that he was a marvellous doctor. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to left ventricular failure.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions at Preston Crown Court, Mrs Richards' daughter-in-law, Mrs Stella Maris Richards, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of the death. The police investigated and took a statement from Mrs Stella Richards, whose husband, Mrs Richards' son, is now dead. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Joan Holland, who was a friend of Mrs Richards. Mrs Stella Richards did not wish to provide a further witness statement and none was thought necessary. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Richards' handwritten general practitioner records, the surgery appointments sheets and visits books and the cremation documentation. There are no computerised medical records.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Richards was a widow and lived alone in sheltered accommodation.
Mrs Stella Richards told the police that her mother-in-law had the 'usual problems' associated with old age. She suffered from anaemia, osteoporosis and bronchial problems, for which she used an inhaler. As far as Mrs Stella Richards is aware, her mother-in-law did not suffer from any heart problems.
Mrs Holland told the Inquiry that Mrs Richards had very bad asthma for which she had a spray, although this was probably an inhaler. She remembers that Mrs Richards had a heart problem for which she took tablets, that she frequently had chest pains and that she had a spray for angina. She remembers that in the last year of her life she was troubled by breathlessness, which restricted her mobility.
The medical records show that Mrs Richards had hypertension for which she took Moduretic until it was stopped in July 1986 because it was thought to be lowering her blood pressure too much. Thereafter, the blood pressure appears to have remained at acceptable levels. The records reveal that Mrs Richards had a history of breathlessness, especially, but not exclusively, on exertion. This was attributed to chronic obstructive airways disease. Hospital correspondence indicates that there was no sign of heart failure in 1988 or 1989. She was advised to give up smoking and claimed to have done so in 1990. There are no later records suggesting either heart failure or angina until 1993, when there are entries in June or July to which I will refer below.
In summary, it seems that Mrs Richards' main problem was her airways disease. In the light of the contents of the medical records, it is unlikely that she had any heart problems, although the possibility cannot be ruled out given what is said by Mrs Holland.
The Period Leading up to the Death
The medical history for the last weeks of Mrs Richards' life is far from clear. The visits book kept by Shipman contains a reference to Mrs Richards on 2nd
July. The visits book kept by the surgery staff contains a more detailed entry in the following terms:
'José Richards
- back pains - wants a word'
.
Those entries would suggest that Shipman visited Mrs Richards that day on account of back trouble. However, there is no corresponding entry in the medical records. After an entry relating to attendance allowance, which is clearly dated 19th June 1993, comes an entry relating to an appointment in the surgery rather than a visit. It is not possible to decipher the date. The figures have been overwritten. It could have been 21st June or 2nd July and there are other possibilities, such as 12th July or 21st July. Whenever it was made, it reads as follows:
'a
(
appointment
)
Chest
Ankle oedema JVP
HR 70/- hs I II
Innovace 5.0 mg. T OD x 28
Pethidine 50 mg T TDS PRN'
.
I interpret this entry to suggest that Mrs Richards' chest was satisfactory but that she had ankle oedema and raised jugular venous pressure. Her pulse rate was 70 beats per minute and the heart sounds were normal. The clinical findings, if genuine, would support a diagnosis of congestive heart failure, although this is a condition that was diagnosed by Shipman on very slender evidence. If the findings were genuine, Innovace would be suitable medication. Pethidine would not be appropriate unless Mrs Richards had complained of pain, to which there is no reference. If this entry is related to the visits book entry of 2nd
July, it is possible that pethidine was prescribed for back pain. The position is by no means clear. This is the last entry in the medical records before the day of Mrs Richards' death.
When Mrs Stella Richards last spoke with her mother-in-law three days before her death, Mrs Richards did not mention that she was feeling unwell.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Holland telephoned Mrs Richards at about 12.15pm on the day of her death, to say that she was about to leave home to visit her. Mrs Richards telephoned Mrs Holland about five minutes later and asked her to do some shopping for her. Mrs Holland recalls that Mrs Richards seemed well at that stage and said nothing about ill health. She seemed her 'normal self'.
Mrs Holland believes that she arrived at Mrs Richards' flat at about 1.45pm. This is not a precise estimate. The distance is about a mile but Mrs Holland probably did some shopping on the way. When she arrived, she found the front door unlocked and slightly ajar. This was unusual because Mrs Richards always kept her front door locked and Mrs Holland had a key for emergencies.
Shipman came out of the flat and said 'She has just gone'. When Mrs Holland asked him what he meant by this, he replied that Mrs Richards was dead. He explained that he had administered an injection of morphine to Mrs Richards to ease her pain and he went on to say that he had not realised how frail she was and that the injection had killed her. He seemed his normal self and he was very calm. He had already made himself a cup of tea and went on to do the same for Mrs Holland, who was very shocked.
Mrs Holland recalls that Mrs Richards was seated in her usual chair looking very comfortable. She did not look as if she had been in any pain. She was wearing her normal day clothes. Her false teeth were in her lap, which was unusual because she would not normally allow herself to be seen by anybody without her teeth.
Shipman told Mrs Holland that he had been in the vicinity and had called in to see how Mrs Richards was because he knew that she had not been well. Mrs Holland believes that Mrs Richards was definitely not expecting a visit from Shipman that day. She may well be wrong in this, however, because both the visits book that was kept in the surgery and the visits book that Shipman took with him on his rounds reveal that Shipman was due to see Mrs Richards on 22nd
July. In the surgery visits book, the word
're-visit'
has been written next to Mrs Richards' name.
Shipman entered the following note in the Lloyd George cards for 22nd
July 1993:
'V
(
visit
)
c/o central chest pain dyspnoea in
night
110/70 HS I II rate 60/-
Basal creps
pulse weak feels lightheaded
= C.T
12.50
IV 10mg Diamorphine HCl
1.20
Died C.T. COAD
1.25 warden contacted
N
Richards
(
telephone number
)
P
AYLISSE
(
telephone number
)
Key at 42'
.
This record, if taken at face value, would suggest that Mrs Richards told Shipman that she had been troubled by chest pain and breathing problems in the night. He found her blood pressure to be 110/70, which is not significantly low. The pulse rate was 60, which is not abnormal. He heard crepitations at the base of the lungs. He found the pulse to be weak and Mrs Richards complained of feeling light-headed. On this slender evidence, he seems to have diagnosed a heart attack. He seems also to have considered that Mrs Richards needed a substantial dose of diamorphine, presumably for the relief of pain, although he had not recorded that she was suffering from pain at the time. At 12.50pm, he gave an intravenous injection of 10mg diamorphine. Half an hour later, during which time nothing seems to have happened, Mrs Richards died. Shipman was apparently of the opinion that the death was due to a heart attack and chronic obstructive airways disease. Five minutes after the death, Shipman contacted the warden, who would appear to have supplied him with two contact telephone numbers, the first being that of Mrs Richards' son. The second number relates to a telephone line at the home address of Mr Brian Ayliffe. Mr Ayliffe states that the P Aylisse mentioned in the notes would have been his father, Mr Peter Ayliffe, who was Mrs Richards' brother-in-law. A list of calls made to the warden that day would suggest that contact was made at 1.23pm.
At approximately 2pm, Mrs Stella Richards received a telephone call from her husband informing her of the death. She does not know how her husband learned of the death, although Mrs Holland has told the Inquiry that Shipman telephoned him and this seems very likely. Mr and Mrs Richards went to his mother's flat and arrived at about 4.30pm. They found the flat empty, the body having been removed by Massey's, the undertakers. Mrs Stella Richards could see that her mother-in-law had obviously been active on the morning of her death because the bed was neatly made and the dishes had been washed. She spoke to Mrs Holland and obtained from her an account of events broadly consistent with what Mrs Holland has told the Inquiry.
The records obtained from local pharmacies do not contain any reference to the dispensing of diamorphine in Mrs Richards' or Shipman's name over this period, although large quantities were dispensed to Shipman in the names of other patients.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). The certificate itself has not survived, but the Inquiry has obtained its counterfoil. This suggests that Shipman certified the primary cause of death as coronary thrombosis due to left ventricular failure due to ischaemic heart disease and said that chronic obstructive airways disease had contributed to the death. The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') omits any mention of ischaemic heart disease. On the MCCD Shipman stated that he last saw Mrs Richards alive on the day of death, although this is wrongly stated to be 23rd
July. He said that he had seen Mrs Richards' body after death and that there was to be no post-mortem examination.
On Form A of the cremation certificate, Mrs Richards' son wrote that his mother had died at noon. Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate and stated that Mrs Richards had died at home at
'1320 hrs'
. He said that he was Mrs Richards' ordinary medical attendant and had attended her during her last illness for half an hour. He said that he had last seen her alive immediately before death and that he had seen her body and made a complete external examination immediately after death. The mode of death was said to be a coma lasting only minutes. Shipman admitted that he was present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker was of the view that Mrs Richards' death was highly suspicious on the basis of the contents of both the medical records and the cremation certificate. He commented that there was no record of any attempt at resuscitation on the day of death and that an ambulance was not called.
Conclusion
There are several suspicious features surrounding this death. First and most obvious, this death occurred in Shipman's presence. Mrs Richards had not asked him to visit and there is no evidence that the warden had asked him to attend as an emergency. Mrs Richards had seemed to be in normal health when she spoke to Mrs Holland at about 12.20pm. If Shipman is to be believed, she just happened to have a fatal heart attack at about the time he just happened to arrive. Such coincidences do not occur. Dr John Grenville is of the view that it is extremely rare for a patient to die during a routine visit by a general practitioner. Now that it is known that many of Shipman's patients died in his presence, this factor alone is enough to convince me that Shipman probably killed Mrs Richards.
However, there are other factors which point to the same conclusion.
I am suspicious of the entry in the medical records which purports to have been made at some time in July, but before the day of the death. I cannot properly decipher the date. The main thrust of the entry seems to relate to symptoms of congestive heart failure, yet Shipman prescribed pethidine. I am always suspicious where Shipman appears to have prescribed an opiate drug in circumstances where it seems inappropriate. I suspect that he might have done so in order to ensure that there would be some morphine in the patient's body after death. If there were to be a post-mortem examination with toxicological tests and if morphine were found, he would have a ready explanation. When that entry was made and to what extent it was genuine, I cannot say, but I suspect that it might have been fabricated to lend support to Shipman's claim that Mrs Richards had congestive heart failure which might lead to left ventricular failure and heart attack.
The entry in the medical records for the day of the death excites great suspicion. Shipman's records can never be taken at face value, as it is known that he often fabricated records of patients he had killed. However, this one is suspicious even on its face. Shipman diagnoses a heart attack but does not record any sign or symptoms which could justify the diagnosis. He does not even claim that the patient is in pain. Yet, he decided to give 10mg diamorphine, which is the equivalent of 20mg morphine. That is a substantial dose for a fit and healthy person. However, for a woman of 72, with a known history of chronic obstructive airways disease, it could well prove fatal. I have considered the possibility that Shipman might have killed Mrs Richards by mere negligence in giving her an excessive dose of opiate with the best of intentions. However, I discount that notion as, if Shipman had realised he had made a mistake and had given too much diamorphine, he could and should have given an antidote. Shipman should not have been carrying diamorphine in his medical bag, as he did not keep a controlled drugs register. However, it is known that he often did carry opiate drugs and used them unlawfully. I suspect that Shipman actually gave more than 10mg diamorphine and intended that it should kill Mrs Richards.
The medical note is also remarkable in that it shows that Shipman did not attempt to summon an ambulance or even the warden, who might at least have been able to offer some comfort. If and when Mrs Richards went into cardiac arrest, as presumably Shipman would contend she did, he made no attempt at resuscitation. That is remarkable as Mrs Richards was only 72 and did not have a long history of heart disease. Whenever I find that Shipman's account of events shows that he failed to take steps which any reasonable doctor would have taken, I suspect that events did not happen as Shipman claimed.
Mrs Richards' position and appearance in death were not at all typical of those usually seen following a death from heart attack or left ventricular failure. They were, however, entirely typical of those seen in many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of opiate. I note that Mrs Richards' dentures had been removed. I have come across a number of cases in which Shipman removed the patient's dentures. I do not know why he did this but it is possible that he wished to avoid the risk that the dentures might lodge in the patient's throat as they lapsed into unconsciousness.
I am quite sure that Shipman killed Mrs Richards. This case has his hallmark on it. The circumstances show the extent to which he was confident and relaxed while killing a patient. He made himself a cup of tea while waiting for the next of kin to arrive.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001