The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The First Report
>
Alphabetical List of Cases
>
Tom Redfern
Introduction
Mr Tom Redfern died at his home, 9 Carter Street, Hyde on Tuesday, 29th
October 1985 at the age of 76. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. He and his wife both thought very highly of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Redfern's death was respiratory failure due to chronic bronchitis and emphysema.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that having examined Mr Redfern's cremation certificate, he considered the death to be moderately suspicious. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Redfern's son and daughter, Mr Peter William Redfern and Miss Jean Marjorie Redfern. Mr Redfern's wife, Mrs Marjorie Redfern, has died. An inquest into Mr Redfern's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mr Peter Redfern and Miss Jean Redfern and has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1985 and the cremation documentation. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
At the time of his death, Mr Redfern was living with his wife in their ground floor flat. He had retired from work at the age of 60 on the grounds of ill health, suffering from emphysema. His condition had worsened progressively from that time. In about 1980, the couple moved to a ground floor flat, as Mr Redfern was having difficulty in climbing stairs.
Miss Redfern, who lived in London at the time and could not see her father frequently, recalls that his health deteriorated over a period of four to five years. He used to dread the arrival of winter, when his breathing became very difficult. She also recalls that he suffered from high blood pressure.
Despite his breathing problems, Mr Redfern remained socially very active. He was the Chairman or President of Pensioners' House in Hyde and he and his wife would attend every day if he could manage it. Miss Redfern thinks that he had to give up attending Pensioners' House about six to twelve months before his death. He was also a member of the Men's Society of St Stephen's Church. Both Mr and Mrs Redfern had many friends and there were frequently visitors at their flat.
Mr Redfern's condition became significantly worse about a week before he died. He was confined to bed and had severe breathing difficulty. He had been provided with an oxygen supply but was not happy about using it. His name appears in Shipman's visits book for 15th
, 21st
and 23rd
October and the frequency of these visits may well reflect a marked deterioration in his health.
Miss Redfern, who is a qualified nurse, recalls that about three days before her father died she spoke to Shipman on the telephone to ask how her father was. She thinks that Shipman had visited her father that day, although Mr Redfern's name does not appear in the visits book. Shipman told Miss Redfern that if her father were not out of bed in three days, he would be on a 'downward slope'. Miss Redfern also recalls that she spoke to her brother, probably on 28th
October, and learned that her father was poorly.
The Day of the Death
Mr Peter Redfern, who worked as a telephone engineer in the Greater Manchester area, found himself working in Hyde on Tuesday, 29th
October and called to see his parents at about 12.30pm. He found his father still in bed and very ill. Mr Redfern was agitated and was suffering from hallucinations. Mr Peter Redfern sensed that his father was near to death. Mrs Redfern looked exhausted and said that her husband had been in his present condition all weekend. She said she had asked Shipman to visit. Mr Redfern stayed with his mother for about half an hour and then returned to work. It would appear that he then telephoned his sister.
Miss Redfern recalls that her brother telephoned her on 29th
October to tell her that her father was ill and was on oxygen and that she should come up to Hyde. She recalls that she received that telephone call between 10am and 11am. She set off as soon as she could and arrived in Hyde at about 6pm.
Mr Peter Redfern arrived home from work at about 5.15pm. Soon afterwards, he received a telephone call from one of his parents' neighbours informing him that his father had died. He went straight to his parents' flat. His mother told him that after he had left, at about lunchtime, Shipman had arrived and had given her husband an injection to stop him from rambling and to calm him down. He had died 'some time later'. Mr Redfern either did not know or has forgotten what the injection was.
Miss Redfern recalls that her brother met her at the station in Hyde. He told her that their father had died. They went together to their parents' flat. She recalls that her brother told her that when he had visited at lunchtime, their father had been struggling for breath. He said that Shipman had visited their father in the afternoon, soon after he himself had left, and had given their father an injection of Largactil. Largactil is an anti-psychotic drug used to sedate patients. According to Dr Grenville, Largactil would be appropriate if Mr Redfern were acutely confused due to respiratory failure. Rare side effects in susceptible patients include cardiac arrhythmia and respiratory depression. A large dose might be dangerous in a patient whose respiratory drive was already compromised. Miss Redfern now recalls that she was told that the injection had been given at 3pm and that her father had died about an hour later. However, when Miss Redfern gave her account to the police, she told them that she understood from her brother that their father had died about three hours after the injection had been given.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman said that Mr Redfern had died at home on 29th
October from respiratory failure due to chronic bronchitis with emphysema. He said that he had last seen Mr Redfern alive on the day of his death. He had seen the body after death. There would not be a post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mr Redfern had died at 5.50pm on 29th
October. Miss Redfern thinks that the death had occurred some time before 5.50pm as, by the time she reached her parents' flat, the undertaker had already arrived. However, it seems likely that this is the correct time of death as this was the time of death given on cremation Form A, which was completed by the funeral director, and family friend, Mr Tim Bradbury, and signed by Mr Redfern's widow. It is possible that Mr Bradbury took instructions on this point from Shipman rather than Mrs Redfern but it seems unlikely that she would have signed the form with an incorrect time of death.
On Form B, Shipman stated that he had attended Mr Redfern for two days during his last illness. He said he had last seen Mr Redfern alive three hours before his death, which is consistent with what Miss Redfern told the police, and that he had made a complete external examination of the body 20 minutes after death. He stated the causes of death as on the MCCD counterfoil and said that the mode of death was a coma lasting four hours. He said that his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and those of Mr Redfern's wife. Shipman said that Mrs Redfern had nursed Mr Redfern during his last illness and had been present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville says that from the long history of chronic bronchitis and emphysema, it appears likely that Mr Redfern was destined to die as the result of these conditions. The most likely precursor to the death would be an acute exacerbation. It appears that a few days before his death, Mr Redfern suffered an exacerbation of his chronic conditions; he was confined to bed and was in need of oxygen from a cylinder. It would have been reasonable to treat him with antibiotics. There is no evidence as to whether or not he was so treated. The question of hospital admission should normally be discussed with the patient or his or her relatives. Admission might not be the best course. That death should follow in the circumstances prevailing would not be unexpected.
On the day of his death, and possibly for a day or two beforehand, Mr Redfern had been confused. This would have been caused by a lack of oxygen to the brain. On the day of the death, it would have been appropriate for Shipman to treat Mr Redfern with Largactil. The side effects of Largactil, which can include cardiac arrhythmia and respiratory depression, are rare. However, as Dr Grenville has explained in a report dealing with the effect of Largactil, a large dose of Largactil might be dangerous in a patient whose respiratory drive is already compromised.
Conclusion
The evidence strongly suggests that Mr Redfern was very ill as a result of respiratory failure in the days leading up to his death and that his mental faculties were compromised by impairment of the oxygen supply to his brain. There was grave concern about his prospects of survival on the morning of 29th
October. His death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
There is inevitably some concern when the evidence suggests that Shipman gave an injection shortly before the death. Mr Peter Redfern does not say what the injection was, but his sister recalls that she was told it was Largactil. As she is a nurse, I think she is likely to have remembered the name of the drug accurately. I think it probably was Largactil and not an opiate.
If an opiate had been given, it would certainly have hastened Mr Redfern's death, as opiates depress respiration and Mr Redfern's respiratory function was already severely compromised. However, I can be almost certain that Shipman did not give Mr Redfern a lethal dose of opiate. It appears that the injection was given at about lunchtime and that Mr Redfern did not die until shortly before 6pm. Had the injection been of a lethal dose, capable of directly causing the death, Mr Redfern would have died within an hour.
In a suitable dose, Largactil would have been an appropriate drug to give for Mr Redfern's confusion and distress. As I do not know what dose was given, I cannot say with complete confidence that Mr Redfern's death was not deliberately hastened by the giving of an excessive dose.
In the light of all the evidence, I feel able to conclude that it is highly likely that Mr Redfern died of the natural causes certified by Shipman.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001