The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ernest Colin Ralphs
Introduction
Mr Ernest Colin Ralphs died at his home, 25 Baron Road, Gee Cross, Hyde on Thursday, 23rd
September 1993 at the age of 69. He was a patient of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Ralphs' death was coronary thrombosis due to left ventricular failure and ischaemic heart disease.
Mr Ralphs' death first came to the attention of Greater Manchester Police because they found his name in the controlled drugs register at the Co-op Pharmacy on Market Street in Hyde. The police investigated this entry but did not investigate Mr Ralphs' death until January 2001, when Professor Richard Baker informed them that, on the basis of information contained in the medical records, he regarded the death as moderately suspicious. The police then investigated the death and obtained a statement from Mr Alan Ralphs, Mr Ernest Ralphs' son. The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
According to Mr Alan Ralphs, his father was a big man who weighed about 20 stone. He enjoyed reasonably good health until the late 1980s, when he was diagnosed with diabetes. The medical records suggest that diabetes was diagnosed in 1990.
On 16th
May 1993, Mr Ralphs suffered a major heart attack and was admitted to Tameside General Hospital for two weeks. A letter from the hospital spoke of widespread myocardial damage. On his return home, he was seen regularly by Shipman. In August, he was readmitted to hospital with shortness of breath. He was found to be centrally cyanosed and had severe oedema and raised jugular venous pressure. An echocardiogram revealed a large left ventricle with mitral regurgitation, and the entire length and breadth of the interventricular septum was found to be totally infarcted. Following his return home, Mr Ralphs was in need of ground floor accommodation. He was visited regularly by Shipman. The visits book records an intention to visit on 13th
, 17th
and 22nd
September. The Lloyd George notes show entries for 13th
, 14th
and 17th
September but not for 22nd
September.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
Mr Alan Ralphs last saw his father alive on Tuesday, 21st
September 1993. He had called at his parents' home after work. He thought his father was no worse than usual. In the early hours of the morning of 23rd
September 1993, Mr Alan Ralphs was woken by the police, who told him that his father had died. He went to his father's home and found him on the floor at the side of his bed. His eyes were closed and he looked at peace. The bed had been slept in and it appeared to Mr Alan Ralphs that his father must have got up during the night and collapsed. Mr Alan Ralphs explained that his mother was present in the house but slept in a separate bedroom.
Certification
A duty doctor attended and certified the fact of death at 3.58am. Shipman signed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), giving the immediate cause as coronary thrombosis due to left ventricular failure due to ischaemic heart disease. He noted that diabetes and hypertension had contributed to the death. He said he had last seen Mr Ralphs alive on 22nd
September.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that death had occurred at 2.30am on 23rd
September 1993. He had attended Mr Ralphs during his last illness for a period of three months. He had last seen Mr Ralphs alive 11 hours before death. He said that the mode of death was collapse of seconds' duration. This response was based on a statement made by Mr Ralphs' wife, who was present at the moment of death. Mrs Ralphs died in September 1996 so the Inquiry was unable to seek information from her about the death of her husband. Mr Alan Ralphs' statement does not say what his mother told him about the circumstances of his father's death. Nor does it say what he knows of Shipman's possible involvement. However, Mr Alan Ralphs and his wife have now seen the cremation documentation and say that they do not harbour any suspicions about the circumstances of Mr Ralphs' death. I infer from that that Mr Alan Ralphs believes that his mother was indeed present at the moment of death and that Shipman had not been alone with his father in the period shortly before the death.
The Expert Evidence
It appears that Professor Baker classified the death as moderately suspicious because of the lack of detail in the notes and records kept by Shipman. He did not have access to a statement from Mr Alan Ralphs and may not have seen all the hospital records which have been made available to the Inquiry.
Conclusion
In my view, there is no reason to suspect that Mr Ralphs' death was unnatural. There is clear evidence that the death occurred in the middle of the night and there is no evidence that Shipman had had recent access to Mr Ralphs. It appears that Mr Ralphs must have collapsed when he got out of bed in the night. He had been quite ill for some time and his death from cardiac causes cannot have been unexpected.
Postscript
On 20th
May 1993, a prescription for Ernest Ralphs, signed by Shipman, was presented at the Co-op Pharmacy in Market Street, Hyde. It was for a single 30mg ampoule of diamorphine. There is no record that this was ever administered to Mr Ralphs. At the time, he was an inpatient at Tameside General Hospital, having recently suffered a severe heart attack. I have no doubt whatever that Shipman obtained this ampoule of diamorphine for his own purposes, using Mr Ralphs' name.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001