The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Alice Richardson
Introduction
Mrs Alice Richardson died at her home, 8A Hamel Street, Newton, Hyde on Sunday, 27th
October 1991 at the age of 82. She was married. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in October 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was heart failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
Mrs Richardson's death came to the attention of the police in January 2001, following a review of her handwritten medical records and cremation documentation by Professor Richard Baker. He considered her death to be highly suspicious on the basis of the medical records, which were scanty, and moderately suspicious on the basis of the cremation documentation. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Richardson's husband, Mr Robert Richardson, and her daughters, Mrs Helen Oliver and Mrs Rose Williamson.
An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Richardson's general practitioner records and to Shipman's visits book for 1991.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
In 1983, Mrs Richardson suffered a stroke. She made a good recovery from this although, owing to a combination of the stroke, her obesity and arthritis, she always thereafter needed the assistance of a stick or walking frame. In 1986, she was referred to the Department of Geriatric Medicine at Tameside General Hospital because of high blood pressure. A letter from the hospital, dated 30th
July 1986, referred to a complaint of shortness of breath on exertion and swelling of the ankles during the last few months. On questioning by the senior house officer, Mrs Richardson said that she was only short of breath on strenuous activity. On examination, she was seen to be grossly obese and her blood pressure was 170/90. However, the senior house officer thought that this was a false high reading caused by her grossly obese limbs. The heart sounds were found to be normal. The letter concluded that Mrs Richardson's problems were mainly related to her obesity but that she was reluctant to diet. It ended:
'I do not think she needs to continue with Aldomet but to continue with Navidrex K might be advisable in view of her E.C.G.
(
electrocardiogram
)
which showed left bundle branch block and a diuretic would probably keep her congestive cardiac failure in check'
.
The records show that this advice was followed and the treatment continued until Mrs Richardson's death. As time went by, Mrs Richardson became even less mobile and required a wheelchair. Her breathing became very wheezy.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
On Thursday, 24th
October 1991, Mrs Williamson visited her mother and could see immediately that she was not well. She looked very pale and her breathing was heavy. The next day, she was no better.
It appears that, at some stage, probably on the morning of Saturday, 26th
October, a member of the family must have telephoned Shipman's surgery to ask him to visit. Mrs Richardson's name appears in Shipman's visits book for that day.
Mr Richardson's recollection of Saturday, 26th
October is that he went into Hyde town centre to shop, leaving his wife in her rocking chair. When he returned, he learned that Shipman had been and had left two small white tablets for his wife. However, Mrs Williamson's recollection is different. She recalls that several members of the family (including Mr Richardson) were present in the house when Shipman called that lunchtime. Mrs Richardson was not alone with Shipman in the room. By that time, Mrs Richardson was obviously poorly and looked very pale. Shipman examined Mrs Richardson and wrote a prescription for tablets which, he said, must be obtained immediately. Mrs Richardson was to take two tablets straight away. When asked what was the matter with Mrs Richardson, Shipman said that she was 'tired out'. After Mrs Richardson had taken the tablets, she seemed a little more settled. The computer records would suggest that the tablets were Burinex and Innovace, treatment for oedema and heart failure, respectively.
The Day of the Death
At about 10.30am on Sunday, 27th
October, Mrs Oliver visited her mother, who was still in bed. Mrs Oliver helped her mother to dress, put her in her wheelchair and took her into the living room. Mrs Oliver made her mother breakfast of toast and boiled eggs. Mrs Richardson took her tablets and then said, 'I'll be all right now. You go home'. She did not complain of feeling unwell, although it was clear to Mrs Oliver that her mother was ill. Mrs Richardson looked grey and seemed to have no energy. Mrs Oliver left at 12.30pm.
She returned at 7pm, after receiving a telephone call from Mr Richardson, requesting help because Mrs Richardson wanted to go to the lavatory. Mrs Oliver says that, as she and Mr Richardson tried to lift Mrs Richardson to her feet, the sound of wheezy breathing suddenly stopped. Mrs Richardson slumped back into her seat and Mrs Oliver realised that her mother had died.
After about an hour, Dr Moysey, from the Donneybrook practice, arrived and pronounced life extinct. He said that the family could collect the death certificate the next day.
Certification
Shipman certified that the cause of death was heart failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
He also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. The certificate contains some minor inaccuracies but these are of no significance.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Richardson died of natural causes. She had a chronic heart condition and was acutely unwell in the days leading up to her death. The treatment given by Shipman on the day before death seems to have been appropriate.
There is no evidence of Shipman administering an injection to Mrs Richardson in the hours before her death. Shipman had not seen her for well over 24 hours and he was not alone with her at the last consultation. Death occurred in the presence of at least two members of the family. There is no evidence that Shipman was involved in the death.
I can understand why Professor Baker was suspicious about this death. The medical notes are extremely scanty. However, he did not have the benefit of the witness statements that have enabled me to lay all suspicion to rest.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001