The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Edith Roberts
Introduction
Mrs Edith Roberts was found dead at her home, 14 Pudsey Road, Cornholme, Todmorden on Friday, 21st
March 1975 at the age of 67. Her death is entered in the register of deaths as having occurred on Friday, 21st
March 1975. I have not been able to reach any firm conclusion, based on the evidence available to the Inquiry, as to whether she had died on that day or the previous day. She was a patient of Shipman and had probably been his patient since his arrival at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre in Todmorden in March 1974. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
Mrs Roberts' death was one of the 22 for which the cause was certified by Shipman during his time in Todmorden. Following an expression of concern by Mrs Evelyn Kay Ross (Mrs Roberts' daughter) and after the publication of Professor Richard Baker's report in January 2001, the police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Ross and from Mrs Hilda Mycock (Mrs Roberts' niece).
An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Ross and Mrs Mycock, both of whom gave oral evidence at a hearing on 5th
November 2001. The only documents available are the death and cremation certificates. No medical or surgery records have survived.
Personal Background
For many years, Mrs Roberts lived in Glossop with her husband. When he died, she moved to Blackpool for a short time but was lonely. She moved to Todmorden in order to be near her relatives. She still missed her husband as the marriage had lasted for many years and they had been very close. In Todmorden, Mrs Roberts pursued an active social life. She enjoyed dancing and walking. To her niece, Mrs Mycock, she seemed fit and well. She was entirely capable of looking after herself and her home.
Not long after she came to live in Todmorden, Mrs Roberts was admitted to hospital. Mrs Ross remembers that she had chest pains. During this admission, it was found that Mrs Roberts was diabetic. This condition was not serious and was adequately controlled by diet. Mrs Roberts was careful to avoid all sweet things. Neither Mrs Ross nor Mrs Mycock has any recollection of Mrs Roberts saying that she had anything wrong with her heart or mentioning any medication for anything related to her heart.
Mrs Ross last saw her mother over the weekend of Mothering Sunday, which was about two weeks before her death. Mrs Roberts travelled by bus to her daughter's home near Stockport. She was well during the weekend. After her return home, mother and daughter spoke by telephone from time to time and Mrs Roberts did not complain of any ill health.
The Events leading up to the Death
During the early evening of Thursday, 20th
March 1975, Mrs Mycock and her sister spent the evening at Mrs Roberts' home and found her well and in good spirits. She did not mention that she had been to see a doctor or had any medical problem of any kind. They left at about 9.30pm. Mrs Roberts showed them out and locked the only external door behind them. Mrs Mycock recalls that the door had only one lock, an old-fashioned mortice type lock with a large key. It did not have a Yale type lock. Mrs Mycock cannot remember whether there were any bolts or chains. She does remember that it was Mrs Roberts' practice to leave the door unlocked during the day while she was at home, but to lock the door and put the key on a hook or shelf when she went to bed. Mrs Mycock had a spare key for use in emergencies.
It was Mrs Mycock's habit to go home for something to eat during her lunch break. She worked at a factory not far from her home, which was also very close to Mrs Roberts' cottage. When she came out of work the next day, Mrs Mycock noticed that the bedroom curtains were closed and that the light was still on in her aunt's cottage. She went home to fetch the key and let herself into Mrs Roberts' home. She found her aunt in bed, wearing a nightdress with a bed jacket round her shoulders. She was leaning back slightly against the pillows and looked as though she had fallen asleep while reading her book. Her book was still in her hands and the bedside lamp was on. Her eyes were closed. In fact, she was dead and her body felt cold. She looked very peaceful.
Mrs Mycock telephoned for the doctor. Within half an hour, Shipman arrived. He lifted Mrs Roberts' eyelids and confirmed that she had died. Mrs Mycock asked if he wanted her to help lay Mrs Roberts down, but he said in a kindly way that she should go downstairs and that he would see to it.
She asked Shipman whether a post-mortem examination would be carried out and he said that, because she had recently been seen by a doctor, there would be no need. Mrs Roberts had not mentioned that she had been visited by the doctor. Had she been visited, this is something that her niece would have expected her to mention. However, it is possible that Mrs Roberts had been to the surgery, possibly for a routine check in connection with her diabetes, in which case she might not have mentioned her visit to anyone.
The death was quite unexpected to those who knew Mrs Roberts.
Certification
Shipman certified the cause of death as coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. As the medical records are not available, it is not possible to ascertain whether there was any history of heart disease. The evidence that Mrs Roberts had chest pain when in hospital suggests that though she might have had ischaemic heart disease.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation forms in some detail. As to the time and date of death, he wrote:
'Between 22.00
Early hours of (between 1 and 6)
21/3/75'
.
Shipman said that he had been Mrs Roberts' medical attendant for one year and that he had last seen her alive on 18th March 1975, said to be three days before her death. This entry is not made in his hand and may well have been made by the medical referee after consultation with Shipman. He said that he had attended Mrs Roberts during her last illness for one year.
Shipman said that he saw the body 12 hours after the death and made a complete examination that enabled him to reach his conclusions as to the cause of death. We do not know what examination he may have made after Mrs Mycock left the room.
The cause of death was said to be coronary thrombosis, due to ischaemic heart disease. Diabetes was said to be a morbid condition contributing to the death but not related to its immediate cause. The mode of death was said to be cardiac arrest lasting seconds. Shipman said that he was able to answer those questions on the following basis:
'Knowing her poor state of heart
(
sic
)
and the fact that she was holding a book
in bed:- looked typical cardiac arrest'
.
When asked who had nursed Mrs Roberts in her last illness, Shipman wrote:
'no one her death was
expected though and her two
nieces kept an eye on her'
.
Shipman said that no one was present at the death.
Dr Stella Brown, who completed Form C, did not make any enquiry of those alleged to have
'kept an eye'
on Mrs Roberts.
Conclusion
There are a number of strange and potentially suspicious circumstances surrounding this death.
First, the family says that the death was sudden and unexpected. Mrs Roberts was in good health. Yet Shipman reported on Form B that Mrs Roberts was known to be in poor health and that the death was expected. In the absence of any medical records, I cannot resolve this conflict. I have no doubt that Mrs Mycock and Mrs Ross are doing their best to recollect events, but the death occurred over 26 years ago and it is extremely difficult to remember events accurately after such a period. If Mrs Mycock and Mrs Ross had been able to refresh their memories from medical records, it may be that they would have remembered that, towards the end, Mrs Roberts had not been in such good health as they now recall.
Second, there are other strange entries on Form B. Shipman must have had an account from Mrs Mycock about when Mrs Roberts was last known to be alive. That is the usual basis on which a doctor assesses the bracket of time within which the death occurred. Here, it seems likely that Shipman was told that Mrs Roberts was alive at about 9.30pm and appears to have had time to prepare herself for bed. She was found at about midday on 21st
March and her body was then cold. I can well understand why he would have estimated 10pm as the earliest possible time of death. Why he should have crossed out 22.00 hours and substituted 1am is hard to imagine, unless he had some involvement in the death late that evening and wanted to put some distance in time between his visit and the death. Nor can I think why he should innocently have estimated the latest time of death as 6am. It would not have been possible to be sure that death occurred before that from the condition of the body. A further oddity is that, although he could not state the time of death with precision, he claimed to be able to say that he saw the body 12 hours after death. The inconsistency is obvious.
The sitting position and peaceful appearance of Mrs Roberts in death are not typical of those seen in a death from heart attack. As Dr John Grenville has said in his generic evidence, patients who begin to suffer the crushing pain that generally accompanies a coronary thrombosis usually make some attempt to call help. Often they are found collapsed on the floor. Usually there is some sign of an agonal event. Mrs Roberts did not have a telephone in her bedroom; it was in the living room downstairs. It does not appear that she made any attempt to move towards the telephone. Dr Grenville says that it is possible for death from heart attack to occur while the patient is deeply asleep. That could be the explanation for Mrs Roberts' appearance and position, although most people put their book down, put the light out and lie down before going to sleep. Her appearance is entirely typical of many of Shipman's victims killed by opiate injection.
If Mrs Mycock is right when she recalls that Mrs Roberts was well at 9.30pm, one could postulate that she was taken ill some time later and telephoned for a doctor. It is possible that Shipman might have been on duty and might have attended at her house. If so, she must have been well enough to let him in. If she did so, it is possible he could have given her a lethal injection. If he had given it intravenously, Mrs Roberts would not have been able to let him out of the house and lock the door after him. It is possible that he could have let himself out, locked the door behind him and taken the key away. If, however, he gave her an intramuscular injection of a lethal dose of opiate, it is possible that she would have been able to accompany him downstairs, let him out, lock the door and return to bed and pick up her book before lapsing into unconsciousness and death. My knowledge of Shipman's subsequent habits teaches me that to give an intramuscular injection was not his preferred method of killing. He preferred the faster acting intravenous route. However, these were early days and I cannot rule out the possibility that Shipman killed Mrs Roberts by giving her an intramuscular injection of opiate. If he did, I can understand why he would wish to give the impression on Form B that the death had occurred later than 10pm. He would have wished to distance the time of death from his own visit, which he might fear had been observed.
I do not think I can reach any positive conclusion about this death. I accept that Mrs Roberts was alive at 9.30pm. There is no evidence that Shipman visited her at all after that time. It would be most unlikely that he would have done so unless requested. If Mrs Roberts was sufficiently ill to call the doctor out late at night, or in the early hours of the morning, she must have been quite worried about herself. Yet she must also have been well enough to go downstairs to make the call and to let Shipman in. She must also have been insufficiently worried to telephone her niece or sister at an inconvenient time. These considerations tend to suggest to me that Shipman was not called out and did not visit. Yet, as I have indicated, there are some features of the case which arouse my deep suspicion that he might have been involved. I am afraid that I am unable to say whether it is probable that Shipman killed Mrs Roberts or whether it is probable that she died a natural death. I regret that this decision will not have served to put the minds of Mrs Roberts' relatives at rest. Whilst I suspect that Mrs Roberts was killed by Shipman, I do not find myself able to say that she probably was.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001