The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Jane Isabella Rowland
Introduction
Mrs Jane Isabella Rowland died at her home, 8 Laneside Street, Todmorden on Saturday, 15th
February 1975 at the age of 80. She was a widow. She was registered as a patient of Dr Lewin, who was a partner of Shipman at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Practice in Todmorden. At the time of Mrs Rowland's death, Shipman had been practising in Todmorden for a little under 12 months. Shipman certified the cause of her death as congestive heart failure (CHF) due to ischaemic heart disease.
Mrs Rowland's death was one of the 22 deaths for which the cause was certified by Shipman during his time in Todmorden. Following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's clinical audit in January 2001, the police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Eileen Pickles, Mrs Rowland's granddaughter.
No inquest was held at the time of Mrs Rowland's death but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Pickles. Mrs Rowland's general practitioner records have not survived but the cremation documents have been found. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Some years before her death, Mrs Rowland was injured in a road traffic accident and was confined to a wheelchair. She then went to live at 8 Laneside Street with her daughter, Mrs Edith Baron, and Mrs Baron's son, Geoffrey, both of whom are now dead. Mrs Rowland had another married daughter, Mrs Edna Varley, who is the mother of Mrs Pickles.
Apart from the injuries sustained in the accident, Mrs Rowland was quite healthy.
In her statement to the police, Mrs Pickles said that she last saw her grandmother several weeks before she died. At that time, Mrs Rowland's bed had been moved downstairs. Although she was clearly unwell, Mrs Pickles cannot recall the nature of the illness.
The Day of the Death
On 15th
February 1975, Mrs Pickles' mother telephoned her to say that Mrs Rowland had died. Some time later, Mrs Pickles spoke to her mother and aunt. They both said that Shipman had visited Mrs Rowland prior to her death and administered an injection to 'make her more comfortable and to assist her breathing' because, as far as they were aware, Mrs Rowland was suffering from pneumonia. They went on to say that Shipman had returned a couple of hours after administering the injection and certified Mrs Rowland to be dead. Apparently, both Mrs Varley and Mrs Baron were of the opinion that Shipman had killed their mother, although they thought that he had 'done her a favour' in relieving her from her pain and suffering. Everyone had believed that Mrs Rowland was very ill and had only a few days to live.
Mrs Pickles understands that the reason Shipman attended on the Saturday, rather than Dr Lewin, was because it was a weekend and he was the emergency doctor under the practice rota.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although neither the certificate nor its counterfoil has survived, the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') shows that he certified that the cause of Mrs Rowland's death was CHF due to ischaemic heart disease.
Mrs Baron completed the application for cremation. In Form A of the cremation certificate, in response to the direct question, she said that she had no reason to suspect that the death was due to violence, poison, privation or neglect. Over the years, Mrs Baron continued to insist that her mother had been killed by Shipman, although she never reported her concern to the authorities.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate, and recorded the time of death as
'1700hrs'
. He said that he had been Mrs Rowland's medical attendant for one year on the basis that he was part of a group practice with whom she had been registered for 25 years. He said that he had attended her during her last illness for three to four days. He had last seen her alive on the day of her death and saw her within five minutes after the death, when he carried out a
'Complete'
examination. The mode of death was said to be coma of about 12 hours. In response to question 11 (as to whether Shipman's answers as to the cause and mode of death were given on the basis of his own observations or those of others) Shipman recorded,
'own and daughter of deceased'
. He said that Mrs Rowland's daughter and grandson had nursed her and that the grandson and two daughters were present at the moment of death.
Dr Stella Brown completed Form C of the cremation certificate. She said that she had seen and questioned Mr and Mrs Baron and Mrs Varley. She interviewed them together and, having done so, she was satisfied that the cause of death was CHF due to ischaemic heart disease.
Shipman's Interview
Shipman was interviewed on 28th
November 1975 by the police and a Home Office Drugs Inspector about offences relating to the prescribing of pethidine. During the course of that interview, he admitted that he had signed a prescription for pethidine in the name of Mrs Rowland, although he said that he could not remember doing so.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville noted the history, particularly that Shipman was said to have administered an injection. He said that, if Mrs Rowland were suffering from pneumonia, then the injection of an opiate would have carried a very high risk of causing death by respiratory depression. However, such an injection might have been appropriate if Mrs Rowland was in severe pain. If, on the other hand, Mrs Rowland was suffering from acute cardiac failure, then it would have been appropriate for Shipman to have administered a small (2.5-5mg) dose of diamorphine intravenously. In such circumstances, it might have been the cardiac failure, rather than the injection, that caused death.
Dr Grenville made the point that, although Mrs Rowland's relatives later expressed the view that Shipman had killed Mrs Rowland, it appears that they did not express this opinion to Dr Brown, the countersigning doctor.
Conclusion
There is evidence that Shipman administered an injection to Mrs Rowland shortly before she died. He did so quite openly. In the absence of the medical records, it is not possible to know what the injection was or how large the dose. We do not even know whether Shipman recorded giving the injection. As he is reported to have said that the injection was intended to make Mrs Rowland more comfortable, it is not unreasonable to suppose that the injection might have been of opiate. It is quite possible that Shipman issued and collected a prescription for pethidine in Mrs Rowland's name on the day of her death. As he was at this time probably addicted to pethidine, he might well have done so as a means of obtaining supplies for himself, whether or not he intended to use any of it on Mrs Rowland.
I note that Dr Brown completed Form C of the cremation certificate. It is said that she was very thorough when completing Forms C. It appears that she consulted three of Mrs Rowland's relatives. Although one would like to think that relatives who had an opportunity to express a concern to a doctor would do so, I am far from convinced that these relatives would necessarily have mentioned their concerns about Shipman giving an injection. They well knew that Mrs Rowland was very poorly and had not long to live. They probably felt a sense of relief that the agony was over. They would not have wished to delay the funeral. They might have hesitated to say anything because they would not have been on very certain ground in making the allegation. I can well understand why they would not have mentioned any concerns they had about the effect of an injection.
There are too many unknown factors in this case for me to be able to reach a decision. First, the nature of Mrs Rowland's illness is in some doubt. The family thought she had pneumonia; Shipman certified that the death was due to CHF. Second, we do not know what Shipman injected. Nor do we have any reliable estimate of how long elapsed after Shipman gave the injection and before Mrs Rowland died. The best estimate we have is a couple of hours, but that is what has been reported to Mrs Pickles by those present, who are now dead. She is recalling events that occurred more than a quarter of a century ago.
On the one hand, it is quite possible that Mrs Rowland was in acute distress as a result of CHF or pleuritic pain due to pneumonia. Shipman could quite properly have given her a small dose of opiate. She might then have gained some relief but died quite naturally two hours later. On the other hand, it is possible that Shipman decided to hasten her end and gave her an excessive dose of opiate, intramuscularly, after which Mrs Rowland would have lapsed into unconsciousness and died, almost certainly within an hour. That would have been an unlawful act by Shipman. If that happened, it appears that he would have hastened her end by only a short period. There are other possibilities. Shipman might have given a dose of opiate which was genuinely intended to relieve Mrs Rowland's distress but which actually had the effect of depressing her respiration and shortening her life. That would not have been unlawful. It can be very difficult for a doctor to assess the right amount of opiate to give a terminally ill patient.
If these events had been reported of any doctor other than Shipman, I would have no hesitation in saying that the death was almost certainly natural. Mrs Rowland had been ill for some time and was being nursed downstairs. However, I cannot ignore the fact that Shipman became a serial killer and that his favoured method of killing was to inject opiates. He was at this time abusing pethidine by injecting himself. On or about 12th
February 1975, he had obtained ten 30mg ampoules of morphine sulphate. It would not be surprising if he was prepared to hasten the end of a terminally ill patient. I note that this was a Saturday and Shipman was on duty. He would have been on duty over the whole weekend, including during the night. It is possible that he wished to bring Mrs Rowland's life to an end so that he would not be called out during the night. To suggest such a thing of any other doctor would be unthinkable but, as we know that Shipman was later prepared to kill perfectly healthy patients, it is not fanciful to suggest that he might hasten a patient's end for his own convenience.
For these reasons, I am unable to say whether or not Shipman hastened Mrs Rowland's death. There are grounds to suspect that he might have done but the uncertainties are such that I cannot say whether it is likely that he did. If he did, I am sure that her life would have been shortened by only a small margin.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001