The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Audrey Reade
Introduction
Mrs Audrey Reade died at Tameside General Hospital on Friday, 7th
October 1994 at the age of 58. She was a widow and lived alone at 81 Dukinfield Road, Hyde. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. The cause of her death was certified by Dr H Stewart to be intracerebral and pontine haemorrhage.
In March 1999, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mr Eric Dyson, Mrs Reade's brother, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her death. The police investigated Mrs Reade's death and concluded that she had died of natural causes.
As there had been an expression of concern as to the circumstances of Mrs Reade's death, the Inquiry undertook initial investigative steps. I wrote to Mr Dyson, to express the preliminary view that there was no reason to suspect that Mrs Reade's death was in any way suspicious. Mr Dyson replied to that letter on 18th
September 2001. The letter is countersigned by Mrs Reade's elder sister, Mrs Mary Bickerdike. Both had remained concerned as to the circumstances of Mrs Reade's death and added:
'...apart from arthritis in the fingers, Audrey was a fit, energetic and healthy 58 year old, who had suffered no serious illness in her entire life. She lost her husband, also a patient of Shipman, about 11 months previously. Her own visits to Shipman were only in consequence of her arthritis, and whether she visited him for that, or any other reason, directly previous to her death, can only be revealed by inspecting Shipman's appointment book. We certainly know that she was in extremely good health the night previous to her death as was confirmed by my sister's telephone call to her (a weekly ritual since the death of her husband).
What we do know is that after weeks of deliberation, she had the mind and the energy to make a double bus journey (she didn't drive) from Dukinfield to Hyde and then to Mossley to pursue the possibility of exchanging her much loved new caravan (two berth towing caravan) for one which would be of more use for her family and their children.
The winter's day was fine and sunny, as Audrey explained her intention to one of the caravan sales staff. She said that she felt a little weak and sick and was invited to sit down and have a drink. When the staff member returned with the drink she was in a coma from which she never regained consciousness, the life support machine was switched off three days later in Ashton Hospital.
Under the circumstances, and in view of the increased number of patients being added to Shipman's death list, it is clear that the possibility of diversification in Shipman's killing methods could be revealed at a later date. For this reason, my sister and I feel that to close the file permanently on our younger sister's death would be presumptive and certainly premature'
.
The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Reade's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books, and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Reade appeared to be in good health prior to 3rd
October 1994 and there is no indication within her medical records that she suffered from any life-threatening condition. According to her computerised medical records, she last consulted Shipman on 23rd
August 1994, some six weeks prior to her death. That appointment appears to have been a routine periodical check. The appointments sheets, visits book, practice nurse's book and acute prescriptions books have been examined and Mrs Reade's name does not appear in the seven days prior to and including 3rd
October 1994.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
On 3rd
October 1994, Mrs Reade took a bus from Dukinfield to Hyde and then a second bus from Hyde to Mossley. Shortly after arriving at her destination, Shipleys' Caravans in Mossley, Mrs Reade felt weak and nauseous. A member of staff at the caravan showroom went to make Mrs Reade a drink and when she returned, she found that Mrs Reade had collapsed and was unconscious. She never regained consciousness.
Mrs Reade was taken by ambulance to Tameside General Hospital. The patient report form, completed by the paramedics, records the history and a diagnosis of pontine haemorrhage. On admission, Mrs Reade was recorded as measuring 3/15 on the Glasgow Coma Scale, which means that she was deeply comatose.
A CT (computerised tomography) scan was carried out as a matter of urgency and was said to confirm massive intracerebral and pontine haemorrhage. The report reads as follows:
'...there is haemorrhage in the left frontal lobe causing some displacement of mid-line to the right. The haemorrhage has extended along the mid-line and also in the ventricular system filling the lateral third and fourth ventricles. There is also some blood in the sub-arachnoid space'
.
A sample of Mrs Reade's urine was sent for poison screening. Salicylate and paracetamol were not detected. Glucose and urea were noted to be high; and sodium, potassium and calcium were recorded as being low. The tests were otherwise within normal limits.
Mrs Reade died at 2.20pm on 7th
October. The discharge summary from Tameside General Hospital, dated 18th
October 1994, recorded that the cause of her death was
'massive intra-cerebral and pontine haemorrhage'
.
The Expert Evidence
The Inquiry has received expert evidence from Professor Henry McQuay, a consultant anaesthetist with special expertise in pain relief, and Dr John Grenville, an experienced general practitioner. They have compiled a joint report on the 'Dose, Route and Effects' of opiates. They explain that a lethal dose of opiate administered intravenously would result in unconsciousness and death within a few minutes. In oral evidence, Dr Grenville has described the effect of a sub-lethal dose, which is a dose which is insufficient to kill directly but sufficient to cause permanent brain damage, leading to death at a later time. Such a dose would result in unconsciousness within a few minutes. Death might be delayed for hours or days. If a lethal dose were given intramuscularly, absorption would be slower and unconsciousness would follow in about 30 minutes. Death would occur within about an hour. With a sub-lethal dose, death might be delayed but unconsciousness would occur in about 30 minutes, as for a lethal dose. It is clear from this that Mrs Reade cannot have died as the result of a lethal or sub-lethal dose of opiate. That she was conscious throughout her bus journeys from Hyde to Mossley rules out that possibility. Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry, has pointed out that Mrs Reade was given nalaxone on arrival in hospital. This is a routine procedure, designed to counteract the effect of any opiates the patient might have taken or been given.
Dr Esmail has also said that he knows of no drug that might be capable of inducing a brain haemorrhage days or weeks after administration. A large dose of warfarin or heparin might produce a brain haemorrhage but it would also produce more generalised internal bleeding which would have been obvious to the hospital staff. A dose of a monoamine oxidase inhibitor could only produce its dangerous effect in conjunction with other drugs or certain types of food. When the interaction occurs, the effect is quite rapid. Dr Esmail can suggest nothing which Shipman could have used to produce the effects observed in this case.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Reade died from natural causes.
It is clear that Shipman did not administer a lethal dose of opiates to Mrs Reade. There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman came into contact with Mrs Reade after her attendance at the surgery on 23rd August 1994. Even if Mrs Reade had come into contact with Shipman immediately before setting off on her journey on 3rd October 1994, the fact that she was capable of changing buses and travelling to Mossley before she collapsed shows that she had not been given a lethal or sub-lethal dose of opiates.
There is clear evidence, in the form a brain scan carried out at the hospital, that Mrs Reade died as the result of a brain haemorrhage. Mr Dyson and Mrs Bickerdike say that Mrs Reade's death was very sudden and unexpected. They are concerned that Shipman might have been able to bring about that event by some method other than the mode of killing that was uncovered at his trial. However, Dr Esmail has said that he cannot think of any way in which Shipman could have induced a delayed brain haemorrhage. It must be accepted that apparently healthy people can and do die quite unexpectedly.
My conclusion is that it is clear that Shipman did not play any part in Mrs Reade's death. I hope this decision will serve to allay the anxieties of her relatives.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001