The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The First Report
>
Alphabetical List of Cases
>
Esther Hannah Roberts
Introduction
Mrs Esther Hannah Roberts died at her home, 11 Bryce Street, Hyde on Wednesday, 20th
December 1978 at the age of 89. Although she seldom consulted a doctor, it appears that she was probably registered with Dr Bennett prior to his retirement and therefore became a patient of Shipman on his arrival in Hyde in October 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia.
In June 2001, the Inquiry took possession of a number of Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoils for which Shipman was the certifying doctor. Mrs Roberts' MCCD counterfoil was amongst them. The Inquiry also found the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs Roberts, where it is recorded that her niece, Mrs Doreen Platt, was the informant in relation to the death and that she was present at the moment of death. The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Platt.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Roberts was a widow and was pre-deceased by her only son. She was living with Mrs Platt and Mrs Platt's father at the time of her death. Mrs Platt says that Mrs Roberts was 'like a second mother'.
Mrs Platt recalls that Mrs Roberts was always healthy and rarely required medical attention. Mrs Platt cannot recall Mrs Roberts ever attending the Donneybrook Surgery and she remembers only one occasion when Dr Bennett had visited her at home. That was a long time before her death.
During 1978, Mrs Roberts began to have difficulty in climbing the stairs. It made her breathless. A downstairs room was made into a bedroom for her.
The Events Leading up to Death
At the beginning of December 1978, Mrs Roberts became unwell. She looked pale and lost her appetite. She developed a chesty cough. Her condition deteriorated and she became very weak, to the point where she needed help from Mrs Platt in washing and dressing. She stayed in bed for the few days prior to her death and, by 19th
December, her breathing had become 'rattly'.
On Tuesday, 19th
December, Mrs Platt telephoned the Donneybrook Surgery and requested a visit. Shipman attended with a district nurse and said that he had never met Mrs Roberts. Mrs Platt told him that her aunt had never previously needed a doctor. Shipman said that he would give Mrs Roberts an injection. Mrs Platt thinks that he did not say what the purpose of the injection was. If he did, she has forgotten. Mrs Platt was present when the nurse gave the injection. Soon afterwards, Mrs Roberts appeared to settle. Her breathing was still rattly. She remained conscious. When Shipman had gone, Mrs Platt stayed with her aunt for the rest of the day. Mrs Platt cannot remember at what time Shipman visited, but she thinks it was during the day and not in the evening.
Mrs Platt was with her aunt when she died at about 4am on 20th
December, some hours after Shipman's visit. At the time of his departure, Shipman had said that he could be contacted at any time of the night. Mrs Platt therefore telephoned him and he returned to the house and confirmed that Mrs Roberts had died.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. The certificate itself has not survived, but the counterfoil shows that Shipman said that the death occurred on 20th
December, that he had last seen Mrs Roberts alive on 19th
December 1978 and that the cause of death was bronchopneumonia. He also stated that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that he had seen the body after death. These entries are all consistent with the evidence of Mrs Platt.
Conclusion
Mrs Platt's description of the development of her aunt's symptoms is entirely consistent with developing bronchopneumonia. Dr John Grenville has described the usual course of this condition in his generic evidence. The range of treatments available for bronchopneumonia includes an intravenous injection of antibiotics. It is entirely possible that Shipman gave Mrs Roberts an antibiotic on 19th
December.
Shipman's visit took place several hours before Mrs Roberts' death, probably over 12 hours. In his evidence to the Inquiry, Professor Henry McQuay said that an intravenous dose of opiate would reach maximal effect within a few minutes. If the dose were lethal, the patient would die within minutes. An intramuscular dose would reach maximal effect within about an hour and, if the dose were lethal, the patient would die within that time. After a few hours, the effect of the drug would be wearing off. That Mrs Roberts lived for several hours after Shipman's visit demonstrates that he cannot have given her a lethal dose of opiate. As she remained conscious for some time after Shipman's departure, it appears very unlikely that the injection was of an opiate or a sedative. It seems likely that the injection was an antibiotic.
Mrs Platt has provided a clear account of her aunt's symptoms, which were entirely typical of bronchopneumonia. As there is no reason to suppose that Shipman played any sinister part in this death, I am able to say that I am quite satisfied that Mrs Roberts died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001