The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Annie Rowbottom
Introduction
Miss Annie Rowbottom died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Saturday, 1st
May 1982 at the age of 91. She was a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was senility.
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, the cremation certificate, Shipman's visits book for 1982 and the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Rowbottom was admitted to Charnley House from her home in Dukinfield on 28th
September 1979. The daily diary suggests that the last day on which she was seen by Shipman was 13th
April 1982, just over two weeks before she died. He recommended that the dosage of Heminevrin syrup which she was then taking be increased to 20ml. Heminevrin is a brand name for clomethiazole, which is indicated for use as a hypnotic in the elderly. It may well be that this increase in dose was brought about by the fact that Miss Rowbottom had apparently been quite disturbed the previous night and the staff thought that a doctor might change her level of sedation.
Between 13th
and 24th
April 1982, there are no noteworthy entries relating to Miss Rowbottom. Her condition seems to have been poor. She was confined to bed and had bedsores on her heels. She was given
'all care'
. Her name appears in Shipman's visits book for 20th
April, which suggests an intention to visit her but the daily diary does not record a visit. However, the notes for that day are unusually brief and it is possible that they are incomplete.
By Saturday, 24th
April 1982, Miss Rowbottom's condition was deteriorating and it continued to do so. On Tuesday, 27th
April, she was said to be deteriorating rapidly. On 27th
April, the record suggests that Shipman visited
'Mrs Rowbotham'
,
which is probably a misspelling of Miss Rowbottom's name. No treatment was ordered. On 28th
April, the daily diary records that the staff had to moisten her lips. Although Miss Rowbottom seemed brighter on Thursday, 29th
April, she deteriorated again during the night of the following day.
The Day of the Death
The daily diary for 1st
May 1982 records that Miss Rowbottom died at 8.45am. Her doctor and relatives were informed. The afternoon report confirms that Miss Rowbottom's relatives had attended and had taken the MCCD. I infer from that that a doctor had called to certify the cause of death, enabling the relatives to take away the MCCD. I infer that the doctor was Shipman. Miss Rowbottom's name appears in Shipman's visits book for the day of her death. I think it is highly likely that the surgery had been informed of her death and Shipman attended only for the purpose of certifying the fact and cause of death.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD counterfoil on Saturday, 1st
May 1982. He said that he had last seen Miss Rowbottom alive on 28th
April 1982, although this assertion is not supported either by the visits book or the daily diary. It is probably a mistake for 27th
April. He said that there was to be no post-mortem examination and that he had seen the body after death. He said that the cause of death was senility and that diabetes mellitus had contributed to the death.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He said that Miss Rowbottom had died at
'08.45'
. He said that he had attended Miss Rowbottom during her last illness for three months. He said that he had last seen her alive three days before her death. He said that he saw her body within three hours after the death and that he made a complete external examination of it. He said that Miss Rowbottom had been in a coma for
'several (3
) days'
. This is broadly consistent with the daily diary, which records a rapid deterioration on Tuesday, 27th
April and that it was necessary, from Wednesday, 28th
April, to moisten Miss Rowbottom's lips. Shipman's answers as to the mode and cause of death were said to be based on his own observations and statements made by the staff at Charnley House. Shipman said that Miss Rowbottom had been nursed during her last illness by the staff at Charnley House, and identified Mrs Lanceley, the owner, by name. No one was said to have been present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker examined the cremation forms but did not find the death to be suspicious.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Miss Rowbottom died of natural causes. The daily diary charts the course of a gradual decline. Her death was neither sudden nor unexpected. It does not appear that Shipman saw her for some days before she died. Although her name appears in Shipman's visits book for the day of her death, the likelihood is that this entry was made after the death.
There is an inconsistency between the date Shipman gave on the certificates as the last occasion when he saw Miss Rowbottom alive and the entries in the visits book and daily diary. However, Shipman was often careless in completing death and cremation forms and I do not think the discrepancies give rise to suspicion that he was involved in this death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001