The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Stanley Riley
Introduction
Mr Stanley Riley died at his home, 25 Vale Avenue, Hyde on Saturday, 14th
April 1979 at the age of 77. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was right cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
The Inquiry has traced Mrs Jean Clement, Mr Riley's daughter, and she has provided a statement relating to the circumstances of her father's death. Mr Riley's widow, Mrs Annie Riley, who was the informant named in the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), is now dead. The Inquiry has also had access to the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) completed by Shipman and to his visits book for 1979. Mr Riley's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
At the time of her father's death, Mrs Clement was not living at her parents' home but was in regular contact with them. Her father was very ill for some time before his death. He had had a stroke and suffered from Parkinson's disease. He developed senile dementia. In the last weeks of his life, his condition deteriorated and he was semi-conscious. He was nursed by Mrs Riley and was sleeping downstairs. Mrs Clement visited as often as she could to assist and relieve her mother. Mrs Riley realised that her husband's death was imminent and was determined to keep him at home. District nurses visited daily to treat Mr Riley's pressure sores.
Mrs Clement believed that her father was registered with another doctor at the Donneybrook Surgery, Dr Bill Bennett. She was surprised to learn that there was evidence in Shipman's visits book that he had visited Mr Riley on 10th April, four days before his death. An examination of the visits book from the beginning of the year does not reveal any other visit, which would have been surprising, given Mr Riley's poor state of health, had Shipman been his general practitioner. It therefore seems possible that Shipman visited on that occasion whilst Mr Riley's usual doctor was unavailable, possibly on holiday. In any event, Mrs Clement does not recall that visit.
Mrs Clement learned of her father's death at about 1pm on 14th
April 1979, which was Easter Saturday. She telephoned her mother from the Lake District and her mother gave her the news. Mrs Clement had the impression that her father had died between about 5am and 6am. She believes that her mother was present at the death and this is confirmed by the death certificate. Mrs Riley mentioned to Mrs Clement that a doctor had visited her father, but Mrs Clement had the impression that this was after her father died. It is clear from Shipman's visits book that he was working that morning, as was his usual practice, and Mr Riley is listed as his first visit of the day. His name has been crossed out. It seems likely that Shipman went to see Mr Riley's body that morning as he completed the MCCD counterfoil on 14th
April and stated that he had seen the body after death. He also stated that he had last seen Mr Riley alive on 10th
April, which is consistent with his visits book.
Later on 14th
April, Mrs Clement travelled back from Windermere to her parents' home. The death had been expected and Mrs Clement has no suspicion that Shipman was responsible for it.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mr Riley died as the result of natural causes, as certified by Shipman. Mrs Clement has a clear recollection of her father's medical condition and remembers what her mother told her of the circumstances surrounding his death. There is no reason to suspect that Shipman was in any way responsible for Mr Riley's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001