The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Alice Rawling
Introduction
Mrs Alice Rawling died at Pole Bank Hall, a residential home for the elderly, Stockport Road, Hyde on Wednesday, 5th
October 1988 at the age of 100. She had been a patient of Shipman since 1979. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the stomach.
In January 2001, in the mistaken belief that Professor Richard Baker had found the death suspicious, the Greater Manchester Police investigated the death. They took statements from Mr Harry Broadbent and Mr Alan Broadbent (Mrs Rawling's nephews), Mrs Melanie Jayne Oakes (a former deputy matron at the home) and Mrs Eudora Potts (a retired care assistant from the home). The police also obtained a statement from Dr John Grenville. An inquest into Mrs Rawling's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Alan Broadbent, Mrs Potts and Mrs Oakes, Mrs Julie Haynes (the officer in charge at the home) and Mrs Patricia Cassin (a retired care assistant from the home). The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Rawling's general practitioner records, Shipman's visits book for 1988, the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil and the cremation forms.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
The witness evidence reveals that Mrs Rawling went into residential accommodation in 1978, about ten years after the death of her husband. Her medical records reveal that she was a very healthy woman.
In March 1986, Dr M A Matin, consultant physician, diagnosed a possible hiatus hernia and there then followed a series of consultations with Shipman, largely relating to upper abdominal pain. He treated Mrs Rawling with a number of different antacid and anti-ulcer treatments. It seems that none of these treatments was particularly successful and Mrs Rawling continued to complain of upper abdominal pain.
Mrs Haynes recalls that Mrs Rawling complained that the pain was 'excruciating' and that she was unable to keep her food down. Mrs Rawling gradually became less well and started to spend more time in bed.
In June 1987, at the request of Shipman, Mr William Samarji, consultant surgeon, visited Mrs Rawling at the home. Mr Samarji wrote to Shipman on 24th
June 1987 and said that Mrs Rawling had very few symptoms to complain about.
Mrs Oakes recalls that shortly after her 100th
birthday, on 18th
November 1987, Mrs Rawling's health began to deteriorate. She was often in pain and spent much time in bed.
There is a note in the Lloyd George cards, dated 21st
June 1988, recording that Mrs Rawling was complaining of symptoms of acid regurgitation and abdominal pain. Shipman noted that there was a possible swelling in the upper abdomen and that Mrs Rawling was losing weight. He recorded a diagnosis of possible cancer of the stomach and prescribed De-nol, an anti-dyspepsia agent and 10mg morphine sulphate tablets, to be taken at night. Dr Grenville told the police that the diagnosis of stomach cancer was only presumptive. However, he felt it entirely reasonable of Shipman not to subject Mrs Rawling to the invasive investigations required to confirm the diagnosis because of her age. In Dr Grenville's view, if, and only if, Mrs Rawling complained of severe pain, it was appropriate to treat her with morphine.
Mr Alan Broadbent recalls that his aunt was very active and had a sharp mind until about the last four months of her life. He remembers that she had been prescribed morphine.
On 8th
September 1988, Shipman diagnosed congestive heart failure. A note made by Shipman for 12th
September describes signs of stroke but records that the congestive heart failure was
'OK'
. A note dated 22nd
September records that Shipman prescribed Mrs Rawling an elixir containing 10mg diamorphine. No dosage instructions are recorded and it is not possible to say what dose Mrs Rawling was to receive.
Mrs Oakes recalls that District Nurse Clegg used to visit to administer the diamorphine. When on diamorphine, Mrs Rawling suffered hallucinations. Mrs Oakes recalls an occasion not long before Mrs Rawling's death when Shipman asked her why Mrs Rawling was not comatose. Shipman said that he would speak to Nurse Clegg about increasing the dose of diamorphine. However, Mrs Haynes does not believe that the dose was increased. Mrs Oakes recalls that Mrs Rawling had been barely conscious, and was possibly in a coma, for a few days before her death.
Mrs Rawling's name appears in Shipman's visits book for 23rd
, 24th
, 26th
and 28th
September and 4th
and 5th
October 1988. However, not all these visits have been recorded in the medical records. The penultimate medical record is dated 28th
September and suggests that Mrs Rawling was doing well and should be seen in seven days.
The Day of the Death
Mr Alan Broadbent and his wife visited Mrs Rawling at about 7pm on Wednesday, 5th
October 1988 and stayed for about 20 to 30 minutes. He recalls that she was sleeping on her back in bed. The Broadbents spoke to Mrs Rawling who was unaware that she had visitors. She looked very peaceful.
Mrs Potts, who commenced her shift that evening at 5pm, told the police that she attended to Mrs Rawling together with Mrs Cassin at about 7.30pm. They turned Mrs Rawling and probably attempted to give her a sip of water. Mrs Potts returned to Mrs Rawling's room at about 10pm. Mrs Rawling looked unwell and Mrs Potts thought she might be dying. She called Mrs Haynes, who attended to Mrs Rawling together with Mrs Sarah Barlow, another carer. Mrs Potts told the police that no doctor had attended to Mrs Rawling during the course of her shift, which finished at about 11pm.
Mrs Potts has given similar information to the Inquiry. She told the Inquiry that she and Mrs Cassin turned Mrs Rawling over in bed at about 8.45pm and that she returned to Mrs Rawling at about 9.30pm. When she did, she saw that Mrs Rawling looked blue and unwell. She told the Inquiry that she does not know whether Shipman had seen Mrs Rawling on the day of the death. She went to inform Mrs Haynes, who remembers that Mrs Potts told her that she thought Mrs Rawling was dying. Mrs Haynes went to see Mrs Rawling, felt for a pulse and realised that she had died. She comforted Mrs Potts who was very upset. Mrs Cassin recalls that she was informed of the death shortly afterwards.
Mrs Oakes told the police that no doctor had visited Mrs Rawling on the day that she died. She may be wrong about that. She recalls that it was Dr Moysey who attended the home later that evening to certify the fact of Mrs Rawling's death, although she may be wrong about that too, as the duty doctor transfer book shows that Shipman was on duty until 10.50pm that night. Mrs Rawling's name appears twice in Shipman's visits book for 5th
October. The first entry appears as one of three names, which appear to be Shipman's own patients. All three names have been crossed out, as though the visits have been completed. There is then a line under which appears a list of five patients, three of whom are not Shipman's. This appears to be a list of patients he had to see while on out of hours duty. Mrs Rawling's name is the first on this list and there is a cross or crucifix sign alongside, indicating that Mrs Rawling had died. It would appear likely that this entry was made when Shipman was informed of the death and was asked to attend. The medical records contain an entry recording the death at 8.30pm and the causes which Shipman later certified. However, there is no entry in the medical records to confirm that Shipman visited Mrs Rawling on 5th
October while she was still alive.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman wrote that Mrs Rawling had died at Pole Bank Hall on 5th
October 1988. He said that he had last seen her alive on the day of the death. The cause of death was said to be carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the stomach. He said that there was to be no post-mortem examination and that he had seen the body after death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He recorded that Mrs Rawling died at 8.30pm on 5th
October 1988. He said that he had attended Mrs Rawling during her last illness for at least 18 months. He stated that he last saw her alive six hours before her death, which would have been during the early afternoon of 5th
October. This is consistent with the first entry for 5th
October in his visits book but it is not confirmed by an entry in the medical records. Shipman stated the cause of death as on the MCCD counterfoil and said that the mode of death was a coma lasting 36 hours. That is broadly consistent with the evidence of the staff. Shipman said that his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations. He said that Mrs Rawling was nursed during her last illness by the staff at Pole Bank Hall who were also present at the moment of her death.
The Expert Evidence
On the basis of the contents of the medical records and the information contained in the cremation documentation, Professor Baker found Mrs Rawling's death to be not suspicious.
Dr Grenville observed that Shipman's diagnosis of cancer of the stomach was only a presumptive diagnosis and had never been confirmed by tests. There is very little in the medical records to support the diagnosis and certainly nothing which indicates that the cancer had become widespread. However, Dr Grenville accepts that it was reasonable of Shipman not to subject Mrs Rawling to any invasive investigations.
Dr Grenville says that if diamorphine were to be given to a lady of almost 101 years of age, it is very likely that it would contribute fairly rapidly to her death. Diamorphine would be appropriate if, and only if, it was required to control severe pain. There is some evidence that Mrs Rawling was in severe pain.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Rawling died a natural death.
The witness evidence suggests that Mrs Rawling's health deteriorated in the weeks leading up to her death. Mrs Haynes recalls that Mrs Rawling began to experience stomach pain in about June 1988. Dr Grenville said that if Mrs Rawling was in severe pain it would have been appropriate to give her diamorphine, even though this might well have contributed to her death. The evidence suggests that Mrs Rawling did, at times, complain of excruciating pain and it appears that Shipman's decision to treat her with opiate pain relief was justified. She had become bed bound and, according to the evidence of Mrs Oakes, had been barely conscious, or was possibly in a coma, for a few days before her death. Although the diagnosis of cancer was never confirmed and the medical records contain only sparse information, the general picture is consistent with a gradual decline towards death resulting from a painful condition. Mrs Rawling's death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
None of the witnesses who worked at the home recalls Shipman visiting Mrs Rawling on the day of her death and Mrs Oakes told the police that Shipman did not visit that day. However, the documentary evidence suggests that he did visit on that day. He usually went on his rounds between about noon and 3.30pm. I think it is likely that he visited during this period, as he claimed on Form B. It is not in the least surprising that the staff do not remember this routine visit.
If Shipman did visit Mrs Rawling on the afternoon of her death, he did not administer a lethal dose of an opiate to her. The evidence of Mr Alan Broadbent is that his aunt was alive and breathing when he visited her at about 7pm. If Shipman had visited Mrs Rawling earlier that day and injected her with a fatal dose of a strong opiate, she would have died within minutes if the injection were given intravenously or within an hour at most if administered intramuscularly. It is unlikely that Shipman visited again during the evening. Had he been present at or about the time of the death, it is likely that the staff would have remembered.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001