The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Elsie Royles
Introduction
Mrs Elsie Royles died at her home, 6 Hough Lane, Hyde on Thursday, 23rd
November 1978 at the age of 70. She was probably a patient of Shipman and became so when she and her husband moved from Denton to Hyde about six months before she died. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the breast.
The Inquiry has taken witness statements from Mrs Royles' son, Mr John Herbert Royles (who was also the informant in relation to her death) and from his wife, Mrs Mina Royles. The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil. No medical records or practice documentation have survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Royles was found to be suffering from breast cancer about 18 months before her death. She had a mastectomy but any respite from her disease was short-lived. After her discharge from hospital she only rarely ventured out of the house.
About six months before Mrs Royles died, she and her husband, Mr John Royles (who has since died), moved from their home in Denton to a one bedroom bungalow in Hough Lane. Mrs Royles became bedridden in the weeks before she died.
The Events Leading up to Death
Mrs Mina Royles recalls that she visited her mother-in-law shortly before her death. She is not sure whether this was one or two days before the death but she does not think it was more. Mrs Mina Royles bathed her mother-in-law and washed her hair. Mrs Mina Royles was pregnant and the child would have been Mrs Royles' first grandchild. They were both excited about the prospect of the new baby. Mrs Royles was concerned that she was putting her daughter-in-law to the trouble of bathing her.
While Mrs Mina Royles was with her mother-in-law, Shipman arrived. She recalls that she left him and Mrs Royles alone in the bedroom and joined her husband and father-in-law. After a short time, Shipman emerged from the bedroom saying that all that he was able to do was to make Mrs Royles comfortable. From what Shipman said, the family assumed that Mrs Royles was close to death. Mrs Mina Royles says that, at the time, it did not strike her as unusual that her mother-in-law had been capable of normal conversation and then, within a very short time, had slipped into a coma. She remembers that her father-in-law was very upset after Shipman's visit. When Mrs Mina Royles went in to see her mother-in-law, she remembers that she was sleeping. Mrs Royles never woke from this deep sleep or coma.
Mrs Mina Royles says that her father-in-law found his wife dead, a day or so after this visit. She thinks that it was at about breakfast time when she and her husband received a telephone call. Her father-in-law wanted his son to come round. He had also called Shipman out. She herself did not go to the house immediately but when she did go, some time later, she found her mother-in-law lying in bed in the same position as she had been in at the time of the previous visit.
Mr Royles accepts that his recollection of the circumstances is incomplete due to the passage of time and because recollection of the events is still distressing. He thinks that Shipman visited his mother at some stage before she died but can only say that this was at some time during the week before her death. He cannot remember whether Shipman was ever alone with his mother. He does remember that when the consultation was over, Shipman said that all that he had been able to do was to make his mother 'comfortable'. He has the same recollection as his wife that his mother slipped into a coma after Shipman's visit and remained so until she died.
Mr Royles also says that he was with his wife, at his parents' house, on the day of his mother's death whilst she was still alive. He implies that this was on an occasion after the day on which Shipman visited and Mrs Royles had passed into a coma. As to the day of the death, he cannot remember who called Shipman out or whether his mother was alive or dead when Shipman arrived. He does, however, recollect that Shipman confirmed that his mother had died.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. Shipman completed that on 24th
November 1978, the day after the death. He said that he had last seen Mrs Royles alive on the day of her death. He said that he had also seen her body after her death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination.
Conclusion
It is clear that Mrs Royles was suffering from cancer and probably did not have long to live. It may be that even on the day when Mrs Mina Royles helped to bathe her, she was already close to death. However, that is by no means certain. Both Mr and Mrs Royles recall that on the day when Mrs Royles had had a bath, Shipman visited and she passed into a coma from which she did not emerge. That gives rise to some suspicion that Shipman might have given Mrs Royles a large dose of an opiate or sedative drug. However, if their recollection is right and Mrs Royles did lapse into a coma and if she did so as the result of a drug given by Shipman, it does not appear that Shipman can have given her a lethal dose of whatever drug it was. A lethal dose of opiate would have killed Mrs Royles within the hour. It appears that she lived for at least 12 hours (and probably rather more) after any injection which could have been given on that day.
There is no clear evidence as to how long elapsed between the visit on the day of the bath and the death. It may be that Mrs Royles lay in bed, in a comatose state, for more than a day. It is possible that Shipman might have visited on the day after the bath and might have given Mrs Royles more medication. However, if Mrs Mina Royles is right in her recollection that her mother-in-law's death was discovered in the early morning, it seems unlikely that any drug which Shipman might have given her in the course of a daytime visit could have led directly to her death. Although it is not impossible that Shipman might have come out during the late evening or in the night, it is much more likely that he would have visited during the day.
If the death did not occur during the night, but during the day, it is quite possible that it occurred during a visit by Shipman. On the MCCD counterfoil, Shipman claimed that he had seen Mrs Royles alive on the day of the death. He also claimed to have seen the body after death, on the same day. Those circumstances make me suspect that the death might have occurred during a visit by Shipman. If it did, I would have real suspicion that Shipman might have caused it. If he did, the most likely way was by giving an injection of a lethal dose of opiate.
It is also possible that, a day or so before her death, Shipman gave Mrs Royles an overdose of a sedative which effectively 'put her to sleep' and hastened her death by rendering her more vulnerable to bronchopneumonia. If he had done that with the intention to shorten her life, that would be unlawful. However, I must bear in mind that it is quite possible that Shipman gave Mrs Royles only the drugs that he genuinely believed were necessary if she was to be kept comfortable.
There are too many uncertainties in this case. I regret that I cannot reach any decision. I am, however, suspicious about it.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001