The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mildred Robinson
Introduction
Mrs Mildred Robinson died at her home, 2 Mona Street, Hyde on Wednesday, 26th
June 1985 at the age of 83. She was a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
In August 2001, the Inquiry wrote to Mr Ernest Hartley (Mrs Robinson's nephew), who was the informant named on the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'). The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Hartley, Ms Jacqueline Emma Knowles (Mr Hartley's partner), Mrs Judith Kathleen Page (a neighbour) and Mrs Margaret Taylor (a friend and neighbour). The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1985 and the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Mrs Robinson's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Robinson was a widow and lived alone. It appears that she was very independent and active. She enjoyed company and was a regular attender at the Hyde Independent Labour Club where she would watch the cabaret and play bingo. She often went out on day trips. She would walk into Hyde to shop, go to the club and do all her own cooking and housework. Mrs Page and Ms Knowles say that she had many friends and a lot of visitors. She always kept her door unlocked. Ms Knowles remembers that Mrs Taylor told her that Shipman used to drop in to see Mrs Robinson when he was visiting other residents of Mona Street.
All the witnesses suggest that Mrs Robinson enjoyed generally good health, at least until shortly before her death. Mrs Page says that she smoked a lot, had breathing problems and was often wheezy. Mrs Taylor and Ms Knowles do not recall that Mrs Robinson had any problems with breathing or with her chest. Ms Knowles, who saw Mrs Robinson every working day for lunch and at least once a week in the evenings, says that Mrs Robinson had good health right up to the time of her death. She did not have bronchitis or any breathing problems. She only smoked an occasional cigarette and did not inhale. Mrs Taylor says that Mrs Robinson was becoming a little forgetful but was in good physical health.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
Mrs Taylor says that Mrs Robinson appeared unwell in the week before she died but she cannot recall specifically what was wrong. However, Mrs Taylor says that she was sufficiently concerned about Mrs Robinson's health that, during the course of a routine appointment with Shipman, about two days before Mrs Robinson's death, she asked him to visit Mrs Robinson while he was on his rounds.
Mrs Page remembers that, a day or two after Mrs Robinson's death, Mrs Taylor told her of this arrangement and also told her that she had asked the receptionist at the surgery not to tell Mrs Robinson, lest she think that Mrs Taylor was interfering. Mrs Page remembers, however, that Mrs Taylor said that she had made this arrangement on the morning of the day of the death.
Ms Knowles last saw Mrs Robinson alive on the evening before she died. She remembers that Mrs Robinson was her usual self. She made no complaint of ill health and seemed well. She certainly did not expect her to die the very next day.
Mrs Robinson's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for about six weeks before her death. The last time her name appeared before 26th
June was on 13th
May.
The Day of the Death
The evidence relating to 26th
June 1985 is not entirely clear, which is not surprising as so long has passed. I bear in mind also that genuine memories could have been replaced by the product of discussions which have taken place since Shipman's arrest and trial.
Mrs Taylor, who lived next door to Mrs Robinson, recalls that she 'popped in' to see Mrs Robinson early in the morning, as usual, before going to work. Mrs Taylor kept a wool shop in Market Street, Hyde. She cannot specifically remember how Mrs Robinson was, but says that she was obviously alive, as otherwise she (Mrs Taylor) would have called for help. Later that day, in the afternoon, someone (she cannot recall who) came to tell her that Mrs Robinson was either ill or had died. She closed her shop and went to Mrs Robinson's house. She cannot remember where Mrs Robinson's body was in the house, although it seems that when she arrived, Mrs Robinson was already dead. She telephoned Mr Hartley to tell him that his aunt had died.
Ms Knowles says that on 26th
June, she went to work as usual. At some time during the morning, she received a telephone call from Mrs Taylor to say that Mrs Robinson had died. She is sure that this was in the morning, as she always went to Mrs Robinson's house for lunch and she had not been that day. Ms Knowles says that Mrs Taylor told her that she went in to see Mrs Robinson that morning and found her dead in bed. Ms Knowles went straight to Mrs Robinson's house. Mrs Taylor was there. Mrs Robinson was in bed, dressed in nightclothes. She looked pale but otherwise appeared to have fallen asleep. The bedclothes were covering her body and she looked as though she had been laid out. Ms Knowles was very shocked, as Mrs Robinson had been perfectly well the evening before. She was puzzled as to why Mrs Robinson had not contacted her if she had felt unwell. She says that she contacted Mr Hartley and he came straight over. She remembers that the MCCD had been left on the sideboard, from which she deduces (quite reasonably) that Shipman must have been and gone before she arrived.
Mr Hartley thinks that he was told of the death at about 2pm. He went to his aunt's house and, although he did not see Shipman, he does recall that the MCCD had been left on the sideboard.
Ms Knowles says that Mrs Taylor has recently told her that she saw Shipman coming out of Mrs Robinson's house, as she was leaving for work on 26th
June. Mrs Taylor told her that Shipman said something about Mrs Robinson having bronchitis. Mrs Taylor, who has been asked about this, says that she has no recollection of seeing Shipman that day or of speaking to him.
Mrs Page says that she has no personal knowledge of the events of 26th
June and believes that she was at work that day. However, she says that she has a very clear recollection of a conversation she had with Mrs Taylor a day or two after the death. She says that Mrs Taylor told her that she had called round to see Mrs Robinson on the morning of 26th
June and had been concerned about her health. She had gone into the surgery and had spoken to the receptionist, presumably to ask Shipman to visit Mrs Robinson. She had asked the receptionist to tell Shipman not to mention to Mrs Robinson that it was she who had asked Shipman to call, as she did not want Mrs Robinson to think that she was interfering.
Mrs Page also says that Mrs Taylor told her that later that morning, when she had returned to her home in Mona Street, Shipman called round at Mrs Taylor's house and told her that he had just given Mrs Robinson an injection and said, 'It won't be long, I'm going to sit with her'. He went away and, some time later, returned and told Mrs Taylor that Mrs Robinson had died. Mrs Page believes that Mrs Taylor then informed Mrs Robinson's family and friends about the death. Mrs Page says that, at the time, neither she nor Mrs Taylor had any suspicions about Mrs Robinson's death and had assumed that Shipman had 'helped her on her way' because she was suffering from severe bronchitis. However, after Shipman's arrest, Mrs Page had talked to Mrs Taylor again and had told Mrs Taylor that Shipman had killed Mrs Robinson.
Mrs Taylor has been asked about the conversation that Mrs Page says took place shortly after the death. She says she cannot remember any such conversation but she says that Mrs Page has a good memory and, if Mrs Page says that that is what she said, then she must have said it.
Mrs Robinson's address, 2 Mona Street, appears in Shipman's visits book on 26th
June. Alongside is a number
'3'
which suggests that Shipman intended to visit Mrs Robinson as his third visit of the day. Mr Thomas Moult, who also died that day, was listed as the first visit.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that Mrs Robinson died at home on 26th
June and that he had last seen her alive on the day of her death. He certified that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis and he noted that chronic bronchitis and diverticular disease were significant conditions contributing to death but not related to the disease or condition causing it. Diverticular disease was not recorded by the registrar on the death certificate. Shipman said that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination.
Mrs Robinson was buried so there are no cremation documents.
Conclusion
The evidence in respect of Mrs Robinson's health is unclear. On balance, it seems likely that she had some respiratory problems associated with her smoking. I think it unlikely that Shipman would have mentioned chronic bronchitis as a contributory cause of death if there was no factual basis for it. There is nothing, however, to suggest that anyone expected her to die when she did. Shipman had not visited her at home for about six weeks before her death. This suggests that she was not known to be in poor health at the time of her death. There is no evidence that Mrs Robinson was known to be suffering from a heart condition. I bear in mind, however, that, at the age of 84, she must have been at some risk of dying of a heart attack.
Something caused Shipman to visit Mrs Robinson while she was alive on the day of the death. That much can be safely inferred from the MCCD. As her name appears in the visits book, I think it unlikely that Shipman just decided to pay her an unsolicited visit. I think the most likely explanation lies within Mrs Page's recollection of what Mrs Taylor told her soon after the death, namely that she had called on Mrs Robinson early that morning and had found her to be unwell. (I think Mrs Robinson had probably stayed in bed.) I think Mrs Taylor called in at the surgery to request a visit. (Mrs Taylor worked near to the Donneybrook Surgery.) I think that Mrs Taylor was not unduly worried, as the proposed visit does not seem to have been given any priority in Shipman's visiting list. It appears likely that Shipman visited in the late morning. I think the evidence that he was seen leaving Mrs Robinson's house is unreliable. I think that Mrs Robinson died during Shipman's visit.
Whether or not Shipman had killed Mrs Robinson, he would need to contact someone who knew her and who could contact her relatives. I think it is likely that he asked one of the receptionists to go to Mrs Taylor's shop and ask her to return home. That is why Mrs Taylor recalls being asked to go home and cannot remember who it was who spoke to her. It is quite likely that she was not told at that stage that Mrs Robinson had died, which is why she has a recollection of being told that Mrs Robinson was very ill. I think Mrs Taylor is probably mistaken in her recollection that she received this call in the afternoon. I think it more likely that it was at around lunchtime. When she arrived at Mrs Robinson's home, it is likely that Shipman was still there and I think it highly likely that Mrs Robinson was already dead. I am satisfied that she was still in bed, although Mrs Taylor has no recollection of this. What Shipman said to her, I am not sure. It is possible that he told her that he had found Mrs Robinson dead in bed (which would account for Ms Knowles' recollection that Mrs Robinson had been found dead in bed). Alternatively, it is possible that Shipman told Mrs Taylor that he had just given her an injection and that she would 'not be long'. Perhaps the latter is more likely as otherwise Shipman would not have admitted that he had seen Mrs Robinson alive on the day of her death. A real possibility is that he combined the two and told Mrs Taylor that he had arrived to find Mrs Robinson breathing her last. This would be typical conduct for Shipman. Whatever he said, I think that Mrs Taylor contacted Ms Knowles, who came to the house, and it was probably she who telephoned Mr Hartley. Meanwhile, Shipman had departed leaving the MCCD on the sideboard.
That seems to me to be the most likely course of events. I have considered the possibility that Mrs Taylor found Mrs Robinson dead in bed when she went round in the morning and called Shipman out to see the body. However, that would not account for Shipman's admission on the MCCD that he had seen Mrs Robinson alive on the day of her death.
The course of events which I have outlined gives rise to a very strong suspicion that Shipman killed Mrs Robinson. I think it likely that Mrs Robinson was unwell on the morning of 26th
June and stayed in bed. Mrs Taylor asked Shipman to visit but not as a matter of emergency. That Mrs Robinson should die before Shipman arrived, is possible but unlikely. If that had happened, Shipman would not have said that he saw her alive on that day. For Mrs Robinson to die during his visit gives rise to a very grave suspicion that he killed her. It would be an enormous coincidence if she had suffered a fatal heart attack during a routine visit.
Unfortunately, there are no cremation documents and we do not have Shipman's contribution to the evidence of what happened that day.
Mrs Robinson was said to look peaceful, as though she had fallen asleep. That expression is not typical of a person who has suffered a fatal heart attack. However, I do not attach any weight to this factor, as it is possible (although, in my view, unlikely) that Shipman arrived to find Mrs Robinson suffering the chest pain of a heart attack and gave her a small injection of a drug to ease her pain.
My conclusion is that Shipman probably killed Mrs Robinson. Because of the passage of time, the failing recollection of the witnesses and the lack of medical records and cremation documents, I cannot be sure of that conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001