The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Mary Elizabeth Roper
Introduction
Mrs Mary Elizabeth Roper died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Thursday, 6th
July 1972 at the age of 50. She had been admitted to PGI two days earlier. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was status epilepticus due to idiopathic epilepsy. Chronic bronchitis and emphysema were recorded as secondary causes of death. At the time of Mrs Roper’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Roper’s sons, Mr William Henry Roper and Mr Geoffrey Roper. Mrs Roper’s husband, Mr George Charles Roper, who was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’), has since died. A statement was also taken from Mrs Linda Byford, who was a junior sister on the ward at the time of Mrs Roper’s death. Mrs Roper’s hospital records are no longer available. Mrs Roper’s body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. No post-mortem examination was performed.
Mrs Roper’s death came as a complete shock to the family. Mr Geoffrey Roper had always known that a Dr Shipman had certified Mrs Roper’s death, although the family did not make the association with Shipman until they saw on the television news that he had been a junior doctor at PGI. They were about to contact PGI when they received a letter from the Inquiry. They believe that Shipman had
‘something to do with’
Mrs Roper’s death, as she had not been ill when she went into PGI and their father had always thought that there was something amiss.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mrs Roper was married and had two sons. She was a housewife and a seasonal land worker. Her sons describe her as having been
‘as strong as a horse’
and very active. Mr William Roper was 24 and Mr Geoffrey Roper was 26 when their mother died. Mrs Roper suffered from epilepsy and her sons remember her having fits when they were children. Sometimes, she would have to be taken to PGI after a collapse but, after her condition became controlled by medication, she suffered only irregular dizzy spells. Her sons say that her epilepsy did not impose any real restriction on her activities.
A few years before she died, Mrs Roper developed asthma for which she was given an inhaler. Her sons say that she never suffered an acute asthma attack but would simply suffer occasional shortness of breath. They say that, so far as they were aware, she did not have emphysema or bronchitis. She had no history of heart trouble or high blood pressure. Her sons do not remember noticing any deterioration in her health during the last 12 months of her life.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
Mr Geoffrey Roper now recalls that his mother was admitted to PGI for a routine check-up on her inhaler use. He cannot remember how the need for a check-up arose or whether she had had one previously. He is sure that she was not ill when she went into hospital. He cannot remember whether she was taken there by ambulance. He and his brother have no recollection of the last time they saw their mother alive.
I suspect that, although the visit to the hospital may have been of a routine nature, the purpose of the check was more than just to assess Mrs Roper’s use of her inhaler. Otherwise she would not have been admitted overnight.
Mrs Roper’s husband visited her after finishing work on the evening of her admission. Her sons told the Inquiry that, if Mrs Roper had been seriously ill, the family would have visited her in the daytime. As they were not expecting Mrs Roper to be in hospital for more than a couple of days, her sons did not visit her at PGI. They do not know whether Mrs Roper was in a side ward or on the main ward.
The Day of the Death
On the day of Mrs Roper’s death, her sons remember their father returning home from work and then going to the hospital to visit Mrs Roper. They later learned that, upon his arrival on the ward at about 7pm, his wife’s bed was empty. When he enquired of the staff as to her whereabouts, he was told that she had died. Mr Roper was extremely distressed and did not go to see the body. He could not contact his sons, as the family did not have a telephone. He left the hospital and met a friend on the way home who lived close to the family home. He went into the friend’s house and the friend then went to inform Mrs Roper’s sons of her death. They recall that they learned of the death no later than 8pm. So far as they were concerned, the death was completely unexpected. Had it been understood that there had been anything seriously wrong, the family would all have been at the hospital and Mr Roper would not have gone to work. Mr Roper kept repeating
‘she’s gone, she’s gone’
. The only coherent information that he gave was that Mrs Roper’s bed was empty when he got to the hospital and that someone had told him that she had died. At the time, Mrs Roper’s sons had no suspicions about the death and requesting a post-mortem examination was not contemplated.
Certification
Shipman completed cremation Form B. He said that the time of death was
‘1800hrs’
. He stated that he had attended Mrs Roper during her last illness for a period of two days. He said that he saw the body immediately after death when he made a complete examination of it. He said the cause of death was status epilepticus due to idiopathic epilepsy; other morbid conditions said to have contributed to the death, but not to be related to the immediate cause, were chronic bronchitis and emphysema. The mode of death was said to be convulsions, which he said had lasted
‘24hrs intermittently’
. He stated that he and Sister Byford had been present at the moment of death. Mrs Byford has no recollection of Mrs Roper.
Having seen a copy of Form B, Mrs Roper’s sons doubt the statement that Mrs Roper suffered convulsions for the last 24 hours of her life. They say that, so far as they can remember, their mother had not suffered from convulsions since they were children, before her condition became controlled by medication. They also remember that Mr Roper did not mention that Mrs Roper had suffered from convulsions before she died.
Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain completed Form C. He recorded that he had seen and questioned Shipman and the nursing staff on Ward 1. He had not questioned any relatives of Mrs Roper. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Conclusion
The circumstances of Mrs Roper’s admission to PGI are far from clear. The implication of the cremation form that was completed by Shipman is that she was admitted because of her epilepsy, although her sons deny that this is the case. Although Mr Geoffrey Roper’s recollection is that the admission was for routine monitoring of her inhaler use, this would not normally require an overnight admission. That said, if the reason for her admission was that she had suffered a severe epileptic fit, then I am sure her sons would remember this.
It is entirely understandable that her sons should not have visited Mrs Roper in hospital, given that they thought she would be in hospital for only a day or two. Their absence means, however, that they have only a limited amount of information to offer about the circumstances of her stay in hospital. In particular, they do not know whether their mother was on the main ward or in a side room.
One matter that gives rise to some concern is the fact that Shipman recorded on Form B that he was present at the time of the death, although he suggested that a nurse was also present. However, in the case of a sudden death from a violent epileptic fit it would not be entirely unexpected for a doctor and nurse to be present, as Shipman suggests.
My conclusion is that the evidence overall is insufficient to allow me to reach a decision as to whether Shipman did or did not have any unlawful involvement in Mrs Roper’s death. Nor can I say that I am suspicious that he did so.
I very much regret that the Inquiry has had to make these enquiries so many years after the death, and I am sorry for the disturbance this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI, once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001