The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Hannah Rider
Introduction
Mrs Hannah Rider died at her home, 5 Monument Lane, Pontefract, on Sunday, 6th
May 1973, at the age of 88. She was a patient of the late Dr Michael Hessel, a local general practitioner (GP). Shipman certified that the cause of her death was carcinoma of the larynx. While he was working at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI), Shipman occasionally did locum work, standing in for Dr Hessel and his wife who were in practice together. At the time of Mrs Rider’s death, Dr Hessel was on holiday and Shipman was providing locum cover.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr James Burrow and Mr Lawrence Burrow, who are brothers and Mrs Rider’s grandsons. Mrs Rider’s GP records are no longer available. Mrs Rider’s body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. No post-mortem examination was performed.
Mr Lawrence Burrow had no suspicions about his grandmother’s death until he was informed by the Inquiry that Shipman had certified the cause of death. He now has some concerns about the stated cause of death and about the contents of cremation Form B.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mrs Rider was a widow at the time of her death. She had had 17 or 18 children, all of whom are now dead. About a year before her death, her left leg was amputated above the knee and she moved to live with her son and daughter-in-law, the parents of Mr Lawrence Burrow and Mr James Burrow. At the time of her death, Mr James Burrow was in the army, stationed in West Germany. He last saw his grandmother when he was home on leave, about two or three months before her death. At that time, she seemed well although she suffered from incontinence. Although she spent a good deal of time in bed, she was alert and still enjoyed being taken out to her local club in her wheelchair.
Mr Lawrence Burrow was 11 years old and living with his parents when his grandmother died. He too remembers that Mrs Rider used to enjoy being taken out for a drink. When he returned from school, he used to sit on her bed and chat with her. He recalls that Dr Hessel used to visit his grandmother quite often in the last few months of her life. He also remembers that a district nurse, Mrs Veronica McVeigh, used to call to change Mrs Rider’s dressings. He does not recall why the dressings were needed. He certainly was not aware that his grandmother had cancer of the larynx but, in view of his age, that is not surprising. Mrs McVeigh has been contacted by the Inquiry but she has no recollection of the circumstances in which she visited Mrs Rider, only of the fact that she did so. Mr James Burrow believes that the visits were connected with Mrs Rider’s incontinence.
The Day of the Death
Mr Lawrence Burrow has a vague recollection that a doctor called to see his grandmother on the evening before she died, but he cannot remember anything more. He says that he has no memory of seeing Shipman visit his grandmother, but that it is possible that he did so. Taking into account the time that has since passed, Mr Burrow’s age at the time and the fact that Shipman was not Mrs Rider’s regular GP, I would be very surprised if he did have any such recollection, even if Shipman had treated her on more than one occasion. Mr Burrow says that he remembers getting up for school the morning after the visit and that, when he went downstairs, his father asked him to listen to his grandmother’s chest to see if he could hear anything. She was lying on her back in bed and looked as though she was asleep. He could hear nothing, told his father that that was so and then went to school. He says that he thought at the time that his grandmother was dead and that he has always been convinced that she was dead when he left for school. He says that he has no idea what happened next at home after he left for school. The obvious difficulty that arises in connection with Mr Burrow’s evidence is that his grandmother died on a Sunday and so he would not have been going to school on that day. I have already mentioned the great difficulty that exists for witnesses in the position of Mr Burrow, who are doing their best to recollect events from more than 30 years ago. The difficulty is particularly pronounced in his case because of his youth at the time. It seems to me quite likely that, when it was realised that Mrs Rider had died, some arrangements were made for Mr Lawrence Burrow to be cared for by friends or relatives, so that he would not be in the house when a doctor came and the funeral directors removed the body.
Mr James Burrow learned of his grandmother’s death in a letter from his father received after the cremation. He is sure that the letter stated that, on the night before she died,
‘the doctor’
had been called out to see her. He remembers that his father wrote that the doctor had given his grandmother painkillers. He was unaware that his grandmother had cancer of the larynx and believes that his father would have told him had that been the case. I am not so sure. In the early 1970s, there was a reluctance to talk about cancer, even after the death of the sufferer.
Certification
It is possible to reconstruct something of Shipman’s involvement in this case by reference to the fact that he must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and probably had some conversation with Dr Hessel, who completed cremation Form B.
Dr Hessel completed Form B on 7th
May 1973. It appears that, before he did so, he spoke to Mrs Rider’s daughter-in-law, Mrs Mary Burrow. On the basis of that information, he stated that Mrs Rider had died at 8.45am on 6th
May 1973. He said that he had been her medical attendant for one year before she died. He said that he had attended her during her last illness for two months. That last illness can in his mind have been only carcinoma of the larynx, which he identified as the sole cause of the death. Dr Hessel did not claim to have seen Mrs Rider recently before the death. He said that he had last seen her alive on 26th
March 1973, which he correctly said was 40 days before the day of the death. Dr Hessel provided certain additional information at the foot of the form. He wrote:
‘patient died whilst I was on holiday from 23/4/73 - 7/5/73. She was visited & treated by my
locum tenens
.’
Thus, it appears that Dr Hessel was on holiday for two weeks and returned to work on the Monday, the day after Mrs Rider died. Almost four weeks apparently passed between the time when he last saw Mrs Rider and the time when he went on holiday. This is not consistent with the recollection of Mr Lawrence Burrow that Dr Hessel was a frequent visitor to the house.
Dr Hessel went on to say that the mode of death was coma lasting two hours. He said that that information was based on a statement made by Mrs Burrow, who he correctly said had nursed Mrs Rider during her last illness. Dr Hessel also correctly identified Mrs McVeigh as having nursed Mrs Rider. Dr Hessel wrote that Mr and Mrs Burrow were both present at the moment of death and I am sure that this information was also based on what he had been told by Mrs Burrow.
Dr Hessel went on to confirm that it was not he, but Shipman,
‘c/o Pontefract General Infirmary’
, who had issued the MCCD.
Dr David Arthur Kidd, another local GP, completed Form C on the same day. He recorded that he had spoken to Shipman and Dr Hessel, before declaring himself satisfied that the cause of death was indeed carcinoma of the larynx.
Mrs Rider’s death was registered on Monday, 7th
May 1973. Neither grandson was involved in or would have had any knowledge of this process. However, in order for Shipman to have been in a position to sign the MCCD, he would have been required to certify that he was
‘in medical attendance’
during Mrs Rider’s last illness and that the particulars provided on the form, including the cause of death stated, were true to the best of his knowledge and belief. It is most likely that Shipman attended Mrs Rider after her death, confirmed that she was dead and also signed the MCCD on the morning of 6th
May 1973. It is also likely that, if a doctor attended Mrs Rider during the evening before her death, it was Shipman. He would have been on locum duty at the time and Form B had recorded that Mrs Rider was treated by a locum doctor.
Conclusion
Although I cannot be certain about it, it is likely that Shipman attended Mrs Rider during the evening before her death. It is quite likely that he gave her a pain-relieving injection. Cancer of the larynx can be very painful and, in the 1970s, the most common form of relief for severe pain would have been an intramuscular injection of an opiate drug. There is no reason to think that Shipman gave an excessive dose of the drug; if he had done so, Mrs Rider would have been dead within about an hour. In fact, she lived until the following morning.
It is likely that Shipman attended again the following day and confirmed that Mrs Rider had died. He would also have completed the MCCD either then or later. The cause of death must have been given as cancer of the larynx and I am sure that Mrs Rider had that condition. Dr Hessel would not have given that as the cause of death on cremation Form B if he had not known of the diagnosis.
I note that, before he signed cremation Form B, Dr Hessel spoke to Mrs Rider’s daughter-in-law and confirmed with her that Mrs Rider had died at about 8.45am and that she had been in a coma for two hours before then. Mrs Burrow was best placed to provide such information and it is likely to have been correct.
In my view, there is no reason to doubt that this death was a natural death and that Mrs Rider had been suffering from cancer of the larynx. I am quite satisfied that Shipman played no sinister part in events.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001