The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
James Rhodes
Introduction
Mr James Rhodes died on Ward 2, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Monday, 22nd
May 1972 at the age of 71. It appears that he had been admitted that morning. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. Pernicious anaemia and
‘old coronary thrombosis’
were said to be secondary causes of the death. At the time of the death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Rhodes’ daughter, Mrs Sheila Mary Roddy, who was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’). Mrs Anne Calverley (formerly Miss Anne Paley, the senior nursing sister on the ward at the time) also provided a statement. The Inquiry has had access to Mr Rhodes’ hospital records and to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. No post-mortem examination was performed. Professor Richard Baker has considered and commented upon the available documents.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Rhodes was a retired coal miner. He was strong and generally healthy but he had a cardiac condition. He enjoyed walking and gardening. Mrs Roddy was her parents’ only child and she was 38 when her father died. Prior to the events of May 1972, Mr Rhodes had previously suffered two heart attacks. His condition was treated with warfarin, according to his daughter.
The Day of the Death
On 22nd
May 1972, Mrs Roddy and her family returned from holiday to find that her father had been admitted to PGI. She and her husband immediately went to the hospital. She recalls that she found her father in good spirits, laughing and joking. He explained that he expected to return home on the coming Thursday and wanted to know who would pick him up from the hospital. However, I should mention that Mr Rhodes was in his own room and that, on Ward 2, this usually meant that the patient was seriously ill. Mrs Roddy and her husband left the hospital at about 6.30pm. They stayed out during the evening and returned home some time after 10pm. Soon after they did so, two police officers arrived at the house to say that Mr Rhodes had died
‘in his sleep’
. Mr and Mrs Roddy were shocked, particularly since Mr Rhodes had seemed so well that afternoon. Mrs Roddy was, however, aware that her father had suffered two previous heart attacks and that he was at risk of another.
It appears from the medical notes that Mr Rhodes had been admitted just before 2am on the day of his death. He was complaining of chest pain and his past history of coronary thrombosis was noted. He was thoroughly examined and a full note was made by a doctor other than Shipman. There was little abnormality to find on examination and the plan was to investigate and observe. Blood pressure was 160/90. Various tests were ordered, the results of which were all later found to be normal. An electrocardiogram showed the heart to be in sinus rhythm, which is normal. The nursing notes record that, on admission, Mr Rhodes had been sedated by his general practitioner. He had a good colour and did not appear shocked. However, at about 4am, he complained of slight chest pain. By that time, his blood pressure was reduced to 110/70. Dr Aneez Esmail, Medical Advisor to the Inquiry, has advised me that this suggests that Mr Rhodes had suffered a further cardiac epsiode.
Mr Rhodes was first seen by Shipman around 3pm on the afternoon of that day. His note is brief and difficult to decipher. It seems that Mr Rhodes was suffering frequent bouts of central chest pain, which was not radiating to the upper limbs. Shipman diagnosed left ventricular failure and prescribed Lasix (frusemide), a diuretic that was a standard form of treatment for left ventricular failure. It seems from the nursing notes that, at about 4.20pm, Shipman gave Mr Rhodes an intravenous injection of Lasix. At PGI in 1972, it was usual for such an intravenous injection to be administered by a doctor and, according to Professor Baker, this injection was probably not relevant to the death, which occurred several hours later.
The next and final entry was made by Shipman later that day in the following terms:
‘2125hrs pt found by nurses - dead.’
Shipman added a note concerning what he intended to record on the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death. At the end of that note, he wrote
‘not reported to coroner’
. This record suggests that Shipman was not present at the death and had not attended Mr Rhodes since that afternoon.
The relevant entry in the nursing notes concerning the death reads as follows:
‘Died 9-25PM relatives informed by Police.’
This entry, which lacks detail, is not inconsistent with Shipman’s statement that Mr Rhodes’ body had been found by nurses, although it is perhaps slightly surprising that it does not specifically record that fact, if true.
Certification
Shipman completed cremation Form B. He recorded that Mr Rhodes died at 9.25pm and that he had attended him during his last illness for 24 hours. That was incorrect; Mr Rhodes had been in hospital for about 20 hours in all according to the medical records. At the very least, this inaccuracy sheds light on Shipman’s cavalier approach towards his certification responsibilities. However, it might be indicative of something more sinister, in that it was a requirement for any death that occurred within 24 hours after admission to hospital to be reported to the coroner and this death was not reported to the coroner. I shall discuss the possible explanations below.
Shipman said on Form B that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. Pernicious anaemia and
‘Coronary Thrombosis (old)’
were said to have contributed to the death. In response to the question asking when he had last seen Mr Rhodes alive, Shipman simply wrote
‘22/5/72’
. Shipman stated that no one was present at the moment of death. However, he also said that the mode of death had been a coma lasting 20 to 30 minutes and he claimed that he could say that as the result of his own observations. Shipman also claimed that he had seen the body immediately after the death and had made a complete examination of it. The effect of these statements is to suggest that Shipman saw Mr Rhodes alive but in a coma shortly before his death and saw his dead body shortly thereafter.
On Form B, Shipman said that Sister Paley had nursed Mr Rhodes during his last illness. Mrs Calverley has no recollection of Mr Rhodes but says that she might well have nursed him. It may also be that she was named by Shipman simply because she was the sister in charge of the ward at the time.
Dr Surinder Mohan Ahuja completed Form C. He recorded that he spoke to Shipman and also, alone, to Sister Paley. He confirmed the causes of death recorded by Shipman on Form B. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B. Mrs Calverley says that she was never approached by a Form C doctor concerning a patient’s death.
Medical Evidence
Professor Baker provided an opinion based on the premise (which was consistent with the medical records) that Shipman did not see Mr Rhodes for several hours before his death. On that basis, he commented that there was probably
‘little to cause serious concern’
. However, I observe that Shipman’s entries on Form B suggest that he had in fact seen Mr Rhodes shortly before his death, whereas the medical records suggest that he had not. Professor Baker noted that the death had occurred in the evening, which is a cause of potential concern.
Other Events
As shown in
Appendices B and C
to the Report, Shipman certified the cause of death of three other patients who died on 22nd
May 1972.
Conclusion
Mr Rhodes had suffered a coronary thrombosis in the past and probably had another shortly before his admission. He may well have had another a few hours after admission. He was certainly at serious risk of suffering a further cardiac episode and of dying as a result. His death may well have been completely natural. That is so, even though his daughter and son-in-law had found him to be quite well only three hours before his death. There are inconsistencies between the medical notes and the contents of cremation Form B but these may indicate only that Shipman was cavalier about his duties of certification. A natural death is a real possibility.
That said, inconsistencies between the medical records and the contents of Form B could have a more sinister explanation. One possible explanation for the inconsistencies is that Shipman was on the ward at about 9pm, went into Mr Rhodes’ room alone and gave him an injection of something which caused his death, but did not make any entry in the medical notes. Shipman could then have left Mr Rhodes to be found dead by the nursing staff some time later. It would have appeared to them that Mr Rhodes had died ‘in his sleep’. If Shipman did not see Mr Rhodes in a coma, he could not have relied on ‘his own observations’ about the mode of death.
On Form B, Shipman claimed that he knew that Mr Rhodes went into a coma some 20 to 30 minutes before he died. Although I recognise that standards of note-keeping were not uniformly good in the early 1970s, if Shipman was called to see Mr Rhodes by a nurse at about 9pm and found him in a coma, one would expect to see a note to that effect in the medical records and some statement as to his condition. One would also expect to find some entry in the nursing records. If Shipman had been passing Mr Rhodes’ room and happened to notice that he was in a coma, one would expect to see an entry in the medical records and some indication that he had alerted the nursing staff to this deterioration. There are no such notes. I do not think that either of those things can have happened.
As I have said, one possibility is that Shipman made a secret visit to Mr Rhodes’ room for a sinister purpose. That theory fits the known facts. The other possibility is that Shipman did not see Mr Rhodes at all that evening until after his death but believed the death to have been due to a coronary thrombosis and falsely reported that he had seen Mr Rhodes in a coma in order to provide a plausible firsthand account of the death. That theory could also fit the known facts. It is possible that Shipman wished to create such an account of the death so that he could be responsible for certification and avoid reporting the death to the coroner. The only motives I can think of for him wishing to do that are, first, a desire to save the family from the ‘unnecessary’ stress (and himself from the possible inconvenience) of a coroner’s investigation with post-mortem examination (and, possibly, an inquest) or, second, to give himself the opportunity (if the family decided on cremation) to earn a few pounds by completing cremation Form B.
Of the two possibilities, I have come to the conclusion that the sinister explanation is more likely to be correct and that Shipman secretly visited Mr Rhodes in his room and killed him there. I am satisfied that there were times, especially in the evening, when visiting time was over and fewer nursing staff were on duty, when Shipman was able to gain access to patients unobserved by the nursing staff. This would be particularly easy if the patient was in a side room. Professor Baker’s statistical analysis of the deaths certified by Shipman shows that a higher proportion of deaths certified by Shipman occurred during this part of the day than for any other doctor working at PGI. I think it likely that this was one of the unnatural deaths that account for Professor Baker’s finding.
As I have said, this death may well have been natural but there are strong grounds to suspect that Shipman caused it and I have come to the conclusion that it is more likely than not that he did so.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001