The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Thomas Henry Ridge
Introduction
Mr Thomas Henry Ridge died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Monday, 8th
May 1972 at the age of 81. It appears that he had been admitted earlier that day. Ward 1 was the female medical ward but men were sometimes nursed in the cubicles on Ward 1 if there was a shortage of accommodation on Ward 2. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Ridge’s death was left ventricular failure due to ischaemic heart disease and that hypertensive disease and left cerebrovascular accident had contributed to death. At the time of Mr Ridge’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has been unable to obtain any witness evidence relating to the circumstances of Mr Ridge’s death. In August 2004, advertisements were placed in the Pontefract and Castleford Express, seeking information about individuals in respect of whose deaths the Inquiry had only very limited information. Mr Ridge’s name was included in the list but the Inquiry did not receive any response relating to his death. Some of Mr Ridge’s hospital records are available but they relate to an earlier period of treatment and are not relevant to his death. Mr Ridge’s body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F.
This decision has been written following consideration of the case papers.
Personal Background
The only information relating to Mr Ridge’s background comes from the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’) and cremation Form A. From these documents it appears that Mr Ridge was a retired railway platelayer and a widower. Mr Charles Henry Ridge was described in cremation Form A as Mr Ridge’s nearest surviving relative and the death certificate reveals that he was Mr Ridge’s son. The available medical records relate to a procedure to cauterise the small blood vessels in Mr Ridge’s nose, which took place in July 1970.
Certification
Shipman completed cremation Form B. He recorded that Mr Ridge died at
‘2040 hrs’
on 8th
May 1972. He said that he had attended Mr Ridge during his last illness for
‘10-12 hrs’
, which suggests that Mr Ridge was only admitted that day. He claimed to have last seen Mr Ridge alive at 8.40pm, which was also the time of death. He claimed to have seen the body immediately after death and to have performed a complete examination of it. The causes of death were as stated on the death certificate. The mode of death was said to be
‘syncope’
and the duration of death was five minutes. These answers were said to have been based upon Shipman’s own observations. Shipman recorded that Mr Ridge had been attended during his last illness by Mrs Linda Byford. In answer to the question as to who was present at the moment of death, he recorded
‘self + Sister Byford’
. These entries suggest that Shipman was present with Mr Ridge throughout the event.
Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain completed Form C. He recorded that he had seen and questioned Shipman and that he had seen and questioned the nursing staff on Ward 1. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Byford, who was a nursing sister on Ward 1 at the time. She does not remember Mr Ridge.
Other Events
Shipman also certified the cause of death of Mr John Auty Harrison, who also died in a cubicle on Ward 1 that evening. I am suspicious that Shipman caused Mr Harrison’s death.
Conclusion
Very little is known about Mr Ridge or the circumstances of his admission to PGI in 1972. It is quite likely that he was very ill and that he died a completely natural death. However, the information provided by Shipman on cremation Form B gives rise to some suspicion that Shipman might have been involved in Mr Ridge’s death. The death took place during the evening. As Professor Richard Baker has observed, an unusual proportion of deaths certified by Shipman took place between the hours of 6pm and midnight. Further, if Mr Ridge was admitted only that day, his death ought to have been reported to the coroner. I have explained in
Chapter Seven
that there may have been more than one reason why Shipman did not report cases that ought to have been reported. I am suspicious in this case, however, that the reason why he did not report the death is that he did not want it to be investigated. Also, Shipman appears to have been present shortly before, at and immediately after the death. That is quite unusual for other doctors but not for Shipman. It is a factor which gives rise to some concern. Shipman did not claim to have been alone at the death; he said that Sister Byford was also present. However, the statement that she was present at the moment of death does not completely allay my concern. During the evening, it would be very easy for Shipman to go to a patient’s bedside without having a nurse in attendance. He could easily give the patient something which would lead to death. He could then call a nurse who would come and would then be present at the moment of death. There is no evidence that this is what happened in this case. However, as an unusual number of deaths occurred during the evenings in this six-month period, it appears to me that some suspicion must attach to this death.
I very much regret that I have had to raise these doubts so many years after the death and I am sorry for the disturbance this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI, once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001