The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mabel Shawcross
Introduction
Miss Mabel Shawcross was found dead at her home, 105 Stockport Road, Hyde on Friday, 23rd
January 1998 at the age of 79. Miss Shawcross' death is entered in the register of deaths as having occurred on Thursday, 22nd
January 1998 and I have concluded, from the evidence available to this Inquiry, that this is when she died. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
Miss Shawcross' death was one of those brought to the attention of the police during the March 1998 investigation. It was, therefore, one of the first to be investigated in August 1998. The police took statements from Mrs Joan Sellars and Mr Bernard Sellars (Miss Shawcross' niece and her husband), Mrs Elaine Sellars (daughter-in-law of Mr and Mrs Sellars), Mrs Norma Souter (Miss Shawcross' neighbour), Ms Nicola Jane Farrell (a paramedic), Mr Jeremy Kenneth Baines (an ambulance technician), PC Stephen Peter Broadbent, PC David Charles James and Detective Sergeant John Ashley of the Greater Manchester Police. The police also took statements from Dr John Grenville, Dr Raj Patel and Dr Alan Banks.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Miss Shawcross but an inquest was held on 15th
February 2001 at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Joan Sellars, Mrs Elaine Sellars and Ms Farrell. The Inquiry has also had access to Miss Shawcross' general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Shawcross was not married and lived alone. Mrs Joan Sellers was one of her nearest relatives. Miss Shawcross visited Mr and Mrs Sellars over Christmas 1997. She appeared to be in good health and did not mention that she had any health problems.
Miss Shawcross' medical records show that she had late-onset diabetes mellitus. For many years before her death, she received medication for high blood pressure, which remained fairly well controlled. Dr Grenville, who has examined the records, says that Miss Shawcross was at a higher than normal risk of suffering a sudden death due to heart attack or stroke. The family thought that she suffered from angina and arthritis and there is a (possibly suspicious) reference to chest pain on 12th
March 1990. In any event, she rarely saw her doctor. She led an independent life. She looked after herself and did her own shopping, for which she would travel into Hyde or Denton most days, by bus or taxi.
The Discovery of the Death
At about 9am on the morning of 23rd
January 1998, Mrs Souter noticed that there was a full bottle of milk on Miss Shawcross' doorstep. This was very unusual, because Miss Shawcross would normally take in her milk before that time. Mrs Souter, who had last seen Miss Shawcross about two days earlier, was on her way into Hyde town centre. When she returned home at about 11.30am, she saw that the milk bottle was still on the doorstep. Mrs Souter became worried and went round to the back of the house. Through the dining room window, at which the curtains were open, she could see Miss Shawcross sitting in an upright chair at the dining table. Miss Shawcross was completely still. She remembers that Miss Shawcross' arms were out in front of her with her palms facing upwards. Mrs Souter immediately thought that Miss Shawcross was dead. She fetched her husband, who agreed. They called the police and, at about noon, two officers, PC James and PC Broadbent, arrived. They were about to make a forced entry when they realised that the back door was unlocked. They found Miss Shawcross sitting in a chair with her head tilted back and her eyes open. She was fully dressed in day clothes.
Soon afterwards, an ambulance arrived. Ms Farrell and Mr Baines confirmed that Miss Shawcross was dead. The police began to search for information as to Miss Shawcross' next of kin. They found Shipman's name in her diary. PC James telephoned the surgery and asked Shipman to attend. He arrived about 20 minutes later. He looked at Miss Shawcross' body and confirmed her identity and explained that she was on regular medication for a heart condition. He said that he would certify the cause of death. PC Broadbent recalls that he asked Shipman when he had last treated Miss Shawcross and he replied that he had not seen her for a couple of months.
The two officers and Shipman resumed the search for the name and number of Miss Shawcross' next of kin. Eventually they found and tried the number of Mrs Elaine Sellars. At about 1.15pm, Shipman spoke to Mrs Sellars and asked her if she was the next of kin of Miss Shawcross. This question caused Mrs Sellars concern and, fearing the worst for Miss Shawcross, she replied, 'No, why? Has something happened?' The response from Shipman struck her as somewhat curt and unpleasant. In a rather brusque tone, he said, 'I am a doctor and I am asking you if you are the next of kin, what do you think?' Mrs Sellars told Shipman how to contact her mother-in-law, Mrs Joan Sellars, at work. A few moments later, she telephoned Miss Shawcross' number and gave a police officer Mrs Joan Sellars' home telephone number as well. In due course, an undertaker was instructed to remove the body.
Mrs Joan Sellars and her husband went to see Shipman the following day. They found him charming. He told them that he had seen Miss Shawcross on the Tuesday before she died. That had been only for the purposes of a routine check and she had been fine. He said she was one of his best patients. He seemed to have plenty of time to talk to Mr and Mrs Sellars. He convinced them that Miss Shawcross' death was for the best. Shipman said that, in time, Miss Shawcross would have become a burden and that she would have 'preferred it this way'. Shipman explained that, because he had seen Miss Shawcross on the Tuesday before her death, he was able to issue a death certificate. He said that Miss Shawcross 'probably' died of a stroke. Mrs Sellars wondered why Shipman did not refer the death for a post-mortem examination if he was not certain of the cause of death, but Shipman did not mention a post-mortem. He did mention Miss Shawcross' antique bench and claimed that she had wanted him to have it after her death. Mrs Sellars refused to give it to him, saying that her son wanted it.
There is no record of an appointment for Miss Shawcross to see Shipman in either the visits book or the appointments sheets for the whole of January 1998. However, Miss Shawcross' computerised medical records suggest that she was seen by Shipman on 20th
January 1998. The following entry appears:
'20/01/98
O/E - BP reading
140/90'
.
I interpret that entry as showing that Miss Shawcross had had her blood pressure taken on 20th
January when the reading was 140/90, which is normal.
There is then a second entry, which reads:
'20/01/98 medication review
All ok blood'
.
I interpret that to show that, on the same day, Shipman reviewed Miss Shawcross' medication regime and took a blood sample. Everything was satisfactory.
DS Ashley has examined the audit trail on the computer and has established that these two entries dated 20th
January were actually made at 4.40pm on 22nd
January 1998. Prior to these two entries, Miss Shawcross' medical records suggest that she last visited the surgery in September 1997.
Certification
Shipman subsequently completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). He said that the death had occurred on 22nd
January and that he had last seen Miss Shawcross alive two days earlier on 20th
January. He stated that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident contributed to by hypertension of six years' duration. Diabetes mellitus had contributed to the death, although it was not related to the condition which had caused the death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that death had occurred at
'19.00'
hours on 22nd
January 1998. He said that he had attended Miss Shawcross during her last illness for a period of 48 hours. He had last seen her alive two days before her death. He gave the cause of death as on the MCCD. He wrote that the mode of death was syncope of only seconds' duration. When asked to what extent his answers to the questions relating to cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others, he did not answer the question but wrote:
'found by neighbour dead at the table'
.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered the death to be highly suspicious on the basis of the medical records and the contents of Form B.
Dr Grenville is of the view that Shipman was not justified in signing the MCCD. According to his note, when Shipman saw Miss Shawcross on 20th
January, all was well and her blood pressure was at an acceptable level. Shipman had not recorded anything which could have led him to conclude that the sudden death two days later was due to cerebrovascular accident. He could not have been sufficiently sure of the cause of death. In the circumstances, this death should have been referred to the coroner as being sudden and unexplained.
Conclusion
I regard the circumstances of this case as highly suspicious, even though there is no direct evidence that Shipman visited Miss Shawcross on the day of her death.
The medical evidence suggests that Miss Shawcross was in good health up to the day of her death. This death should have been referred to the coroner and Shipman's failure to refer it must be seen as a suspicious feature.
The entry in the computerised notes relating to the 20th
January was entered on the day before the death was discovered. There is no reference to Mrs Shawcross in either the practice appointments sheets or the visits book for the whole month of January 1998. In my view, it is likely that Shipman has made up the supposed consultations of 20th
January. If it were known that Shipman had not seen Miss Shawcross since September 1997, the registrar would almost certainly have referred the case to the coroner, with a view to post-mortem examination. What is so remarkable and, in my view, very highly suspicious, is that Shipman made those entries on the afternoon of 22nd
January. That was before Miss Shawcross' body had been found. In my view, this suggests that Shipman knew that Miss Shawcross was dead at a time when no one else did. Otherwise, it is an extraordinary coincidence that he should have made an entry in her records just a few hours before her death. Thus, although there is no direct evidence that Shipman visited Miss Shawcross on the day of her death, the 22nd
January, this entry in the medical record convinces me that he must have done.
The time of death, stated with apparent precision, as
'19.00'
hours on 22nd January, must in my view be a false entry. There is absolutely no basis on which Shipman could properly have assessed that as the time of death. No one had seen Miss Shawcross on 22nd January, unless Shipman had. The fact that the milk bottle was still on the door step and that the dining room curtains were open, suggests that Miss Shawcross had died during the daylight hours of the previous day. Nothing more could be said with any confidence. The police officer does not record Shipman having taken the body temperature when he came to see the body. Dr Grenville has explained, in connection with other cases, that it is not possible for a doctor to estimate the time of death with precision. He considers Shipman's claims to be able to do so to be pure charlatanism. Any honest doctor called out to see a body in these circumstances could do no more than give a very broad bracket within which the death had occurred. Why would Shipman wish to advance a precise time of death? If Miss Shawcross had died a natural death, it is hard to imagine why Shipman would not be content to say that he did not know the time of death. However, if he had visited the house and had killed Miss Shawcross in the afternoon, he would not know whether he had been seen. He would wish to establish that the death had occurred a considerable time after he had visited. I regard this feature as highly suspicious.
An additional factor, which increases the index of suspicion, is that Miss Shawcross' appearance in death was not typical of that seen in stroke victims. It was, however, entirely typical of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of diamorphine.
My conclusion is that Shipman killed Miss Shawcross, almost certainly by administering a lethal injection of opiate. Although there is a theoretical possibility that she could have suffered a fatal stroke, I regard that as so unlikely that I feel able to say that I am sure of my conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001