The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Gladys Saunders
Introduction
Mrs Gladys Saunders died at her home, 24 Ogden Court, Hyde on Monday, 17th
June 1996 at the age of 82. She was married, although she was living alone at the time of her death. She had been a patient of Shipman since 1984 and had followed him to the Market Street Surgery. She held him in high regard. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs Saunders was one of a number recovered by the police from the register office in October 1998 and, after a preliminary assessment, it was decided that enquiries should be made into her death. The police took statements from Mrs Rosina Abrams (Mrs Saunders' close friend), Mr Eric Abrams (Mrs Abrams' husband) and Mrs Sandra Christine Simpson (resident manager or warden of Ogden Court, a sheltered housing facility for the elderly). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Saunders but an inquest was held on 14th
February 2001 at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mr and Mrs Abrams and from Mrs Simpson and has also had access to Mrs Saunders' general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Saunders' husband, Albert, had been taken to live in a residential home in May 1996, as his health had deteriorated. At this time, Mrs Saunders enjoyed quite good health. She was very deaf and her eyesight was not good but she was able to run her home and do the cleaning, shopping and cooking. She was a regular attender at the Hyde Spiritualist Church.
At the end of May 1996, Mrs Saunders suffered an episode of bleeding due to diverticular disease and was admitted to hospital. She made a good recovery and was discharged home on 7th
June. It does not appear that her medical advisors at the hospital thought that she needed any special care on her return home, possibly because Ogden Court was sheltered accommodation where the residents were supervised by a warden. Mrs Saunders remained indoors for some days but gradually resumed her usual activities. Mrs Abrams visited her every day. Mrs Saunders told Mrs Abrams that she felt rather weak and had 'flutters' in her heart and stomach. However, she seemed to be fairly well and went to church as usual on Sunday, 16th
June. Afterwards, Mrs Abrams drove her home and Mrs Saunders made tea and sandwiches. Mrs Saunders mentioned her flutters again and Mrs Abrams suggested that if she was worried about this, she should telephone the doctor.
The Day of the Death
It appears that on the Monday morning, 17th
June, Mrs Saunders made an appointment to see Shipman. She later telephoned to say that she felt very weak and was unable to walk to the surgery. She asked for a home visit.
In the early afternoon, Mr Abrams called round to see Mrs Saunders. He found her quite well and she made him a cup of tea. She told him she was expecting Shipman. While Mr Abrams was there, Mrs Abrams telephoned Mrs Saunders at about 1.45pm. She was surprised to learn that her husband was there. The two women shared a joke about leaving Mr Abrams to make his own cup of tea. Mrs Saunders told Mrs Abrams that the doctor would be coming after surgery, at about 2.15pm. Mr Abrams left her house at about 1.50pm. Mrs Saunders did not appear to be unwell when he left. He closed the door behind him and this would cause it to lock automatically.
At about 2.15pm, Shipman called on the warden of Ogden Court, Mrs Simpson, and asked her to accompany him to Mrs Saunders' flat. He told her that Mrs Saunders was close to dying. On arrival at the flat, Mrs Simpson noticed that the door was not locked. On entering, Mrs Simpson saw Mrs Saunders sitting in her armchair by the window. She was wearing her usual clothes. She looked relaxed and there was no evidence of distress. Mrs Simpson had the impression that as she bent down and took her hand, Mrs Saunders took her last breath. Shipman did not examine Mrs Saunders or even touch her. He spoke about making contact with Mrs Saunders' next of kin, and then he left. Mrs Simpson telephoned Mrs Abrams, who was naturally very shocked. Mrs Abrams went to Ogden Court and she too saw that Mrs Saunders looked very peaceful.
In an entry dated 17th
June, Shipman wrote in the medical records:
'1415. Found unconscious.
not well felt tired.
old age. no other illness'
.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), giving the cause of death as old age. He said that he had last seen Mrs Saunders alive on 7th
June 1996. Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that he had last seen Mrs Saunders 10 days before her death. That was the day on which she came out of hospital. It is clear from the medical and practice records that he did see her then. The visits book for 7th
June contains an entry
'OUT OF HOSP 1PM. PROBLEM STILL THERE. NEEDS INCON PADS'
. He also said that death had occurred at
'About 1345hrs'
and that Mrs Saunders had been
'Found by Warden sat in chair'
. He stated that no one was present at the moment of death. He said that he had seen the body half an hour after death. These statements are inconsistent with the witnesses' evidence. For Shipman to be able to tell Mrs Simpson that Mrs Saunders was close to dying, he must have seen her very recently. The fact that the door was unlocked when Mrs Simpson accompanied Shipman to the flat indicates that he had already been inside it that afternoon. Shipman's statement that no one was present at the death might or might not have been true. Mrs Simpson had the impression that Mrs Saunders took her last breath as she and Shipman arrived at the flat. The statement that the body was found by Mrs Simpson was not true. Nor was it true that Shipman saw the body half an hour after death.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Banks expressed the opinion that Mrs Saunders' medical history was not consistent with the stated cause of death. Dr Grenville said that for Shipman to give old age as the cause of death was wholly unjustified. Such a cause should only be given where an old person has been known to be deteriorating over a period of time with multiple organ failures and where the death is expected but cannot be ascribed to a single event. In cases of sudden death such as appeared to have occurred here, any reasonable doctor would refer the case to the coroner with a view to post-mortem examination, as he would not be able to say with the necessary degree of confidence what the cause of death had been.
Professor Richard Baker regarded Mrs Saunders' death as highly suspicious upon his consideration of the cremation documentation and the medical records.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that the only sensible inference which can be drawn from the circumstances is that Shipman must have killed Mrs Saunders, almost certainly by administering a lethal dose of diamorphine. The evidence shows that she was in reasonable health only half an hour before her death. When Shipman arrived, Mrs Saunders must have let him in. Soon afterwards, he fetched Mrs Simpson, telling her that Mrs Saunders was close to dying. When she was dead, he did not carry out the examination necessary to establish that death had occurred. He must have known when he went to fetch Mrs Simpson that Mrs Saunders' death was inevitable.
Old age was not an acceptable cause of death for someone who had been out and about the day before her death. But Shipman was not in a position to give any other cause of death, because, as the medical record reveals, Mrs Saunders had not been suffering from any potentially fatal condition. Shipman told lies on Form B to make it appear that he had not been present at the death and to distance himself from it.
I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Saunders.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001