The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Bessie Swann
Introduction
Mrs Bessie Swann died at her home, 2 Brooks Avenue, Gee Cross, Hyde on Friday, 26th
September 1997 at the age of 79. She had probably been a patient of Shipman since September 1992. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
In August 1998, the Greater Manchester Police began to investigate all deaths certified by Shipman in the 12 months prior to the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy. Mrs Swann's death was in that number. The police took statements from Mr Barry Swann (Mrs Swann's son), Mrs Judith Swann (Mrs Swann's daughter-in-law), Mr William Avery (Mrs Swann's lodger and friend), Mrs Dorothy Thomson (Mrs Swann's neighbour) and Mr Graham John Hayley (a local milkman whose milk round included Brooks Avenue).
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Swann but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mr Swann and Mr Avery and has had access to Mrs Swann's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period, as well as to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Swann had been a widow since 1960. Her son lived at home until 1974, when he left following his marriage. In 1976, Mrs Swann took in a lodger, Mr Avery, who became a close friend and lived with her until her death.
By all accounts, Mrs Swann was fit and healthy for her age. Her medical records confirm that she was in good general health. She had been taking enalapril for some time before her death. This is a drug which is used to control blood pressure. Such readings as appear in the records show that her blood pressure was well controlled. The last written entry is dated September 1996. Thereafter there are a number of computerised records; all indicate routine monitoring and all show a satisfactory situation.
About four years before Mrs Swann's death, she was found to have diabetes but this was adequately controlled by tablets and appropriate diet. She had occasional bouts of sciatica but these did not interfere with her activities. She ran the house and did all the shopping. Not long before her death, her son found her up a ladder, painting a ceiling. She said she had not asked him to help because she thought he was too busy.
Mr Swann last saw his mother alive on Tuesday, 23rd
September 1997. She came to tea as usual. She seemed well at that time.
The Day of the Death
On the day of her death, Friday, 26th
September, Mrs Swann went shopping in Hyde as usual. According to the police report, her friend, Mrs Mary Taylor, saw her in the town centre on her way to buy some fish for dinner that evening. At some stage after arriving home from the shops, she prepared the fish and put it in the oven. It was Mrs Swann's habit to have a bath after lunch on Fridays. At about 3pm that day, Mrs Swann told her neighbour, Mrs Thomson, that she had just had a bath and had had 'a funny turn' though she did not describe this. Mrs Thomson thought Mrs Swann did not look well. At about the same time, the local milkman, Mr Hayley, called and noticed that Mrs Swann was looking unwell and did not seem her usual self.
It seems likely that Mrs Swann decided to telephone the doctor. Telephone billing records show that a call was made from her telephone to Shipman's surgery at 3.29pm. Whether she asked for a surgery appointment or a visit is not clear. Her name does not appear in any surgery record. However, Shipman must have attended almost immediately. His presence at Mrs Swann's house is confirmed by the evidence of Mr Avery, who arrived home from work at about 3.50pm.
When Mr Avery arrived home, he walked through the hallway towards the back room and heard a man's voice say, 'I'm in here'. He went into the room and saw Mrs Swann slumped in her armchair, apparently unconscious. Shipman was perched on the right arm of the chair and was holding Mrs Swann's face against the left side of the headrest of the chair. It appeared to Mr Avery that Shipman had his fingers in her mouth. Mr Avery was very surprised and asked Shipman what he was doing. Shipman said that he was trying to keep Mrs Swann's air passages open. Mr Avery was puzzled, as it did not seem to him that Shipman could be keeping the passages open. Mrs Swann's head was not tilted back and it appeared to Mr Avery that what Shipman was doing was more likely to obstruct the passages than keep them open. Mr Avery said he would telephone Mr Swann. Shipman tried to dissuade him, but he did so nonetheless.
Telephone billing records show that Mr Avery telephoned Mr Swann at 3.51pm. Mr Swann recalls that Mr Avery was sobbing. He told Mr Swann to come to his mother's house immediately. When he went back into the back room, Mr Avery found Shipman still perched on the arm of the chair with his fingers in Mrs Swann's mouth.
Mr Swann arrived within a few minutes. As he went into the house, he saw his mother sitting in her armchair, looking very peaceful. Shipman told him that his mother had had a stroke and that there was nothing he could have done to save her. Mr Swann was distraught as he held his mother's hand, which was still warm. Shipman said that it was better that she had died because Mr Swann would not have wanted her to suffer and Mr Swann agreed. Then Shipman said that he would wait for a few minutes 'in case she wakens up and frightens us all'. He suggested that Mrs Swann should be covered with a blanket. Mr Avery went to find one. There was no discussion about the need for a post-mortem examination. Shipman said that, because he had been present at the death, he would be able to issue a death certificate. Shipman then left. Mr Avery recalls that Shipman was very 'matter of fact', as if the death was not anything out of the ordinary.
The death is recorded very briefly in the computerised medical records as
'CVA unspecified lodger pressent
(
sic
)
son called cert death 1610 1 cva'
. I interpret that to mean that the patient had had a cerebrovascular accident; the lodger was present; the son was called and death was certified at 4.10pm. The immediate cause of death was cerebrovascular accident.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD. He certified the death as being due to a cerebrovascular accident. He said that the interval between the onset of the cerebrovascular accident and death was 20 minutes. He said he had seen Mrs Swann alive on the day of the death. He had also seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination.
Mrs Swann was cremated. In cremation Form B Shipman said that the death occurred at 4.10pm. He said that he attended Mrs Swann during her last illness for 10 to 15 minutes. He last saw her immediately before her death. The mode of death was syncope of only minutes' duration. He said that he knew the cause and mode of death partly of his own knowledge and partly from statements made by the lodger and son. He said that he, the lodger and the son were all present at the moment of death.
Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry, has given advice in this case. He expressed the view that Mrs Swann was not at increased risk of suffering a stroke. He does not think that the 'funny turn' mentioned by Mrs Swann to Mrs Thomson could have been a stroke. If it had been a stroke affecting the brain stem, it could have made her dizzy but she would have felt very ill and would have had to lie down. In Dr Esmail's view, this 'funny turn' was more likely to have been a dizzy spell of no great seriousness, possibly related to her recent bath.
Dr Esmail has also said that Shipman's action in putting his fingers in Mrs Swann's mouth was not a proper way of keeping her airway open. To do that he should have laid her on the floor with her head tilted back.
Professor Richard Baker examined the cremation certificate and considered the death to be highly suspicious.
Conclusion
There are several suspicious circumstances surrounding this death.
The most suspicious feature is that the death occurred very suddenly within a matter of minutes of Shipman's arrival at the house. Before that day, Mrs Swann seems to have been well and certainly had no history of high blood pressure such as would put her at risk of sudden death by stroke. During the morning she went shopping. However, by 3pm, she had had a 'funny turn' and did not look well. She called the doctor, who came immediately. Within a short time of Shipman's arrival, Mr Avery found Shipman with his hand in Mrs Swann's mouth. Mrs Swann was unconscious or possibly already dead.
For the reasons given by Dr Esmail, I think it unlikely that the 'funny turn' was a cerebrovascular accident. In any event, even if the 'funny turn' was some sort of stroke, it is unlikely that Mrs Swann would have died so suddenly afterwards. As Dr John Grenville said in his generic evidence, sudden fatal strokes, due to a brain haemorrhage, are uncommon, certainly far less common than occlusive strokes, which do not result in sudden death. For a sudden death to occur naturally within such a short time of Shipman's arrival would have been a remarkable coincidence. On the other hand, if Shipman had given Mrs Swann a lethal injection of diamorphine she would have died very quickly. When Mr Avery arrived, Shipman appeared to have been waiting for her to die. He was disturbed by Mr Avery's return. For him to put his hand in Mrs Swann's mouth was not a proper method of keeping her airway open and, in my view, it must have been a pretence.
I also regard the contents of Form B as suspicious. First, Shipman suggests that he arrived 10 to 15 minutes before the death. On the MCCD, he stated that the interval between the onset of the stroke and death was 20 minutes. Shipman seems to be suggesting that Mrs Swann had already had a stroke when he arrived. If he found her suffering the signs of a stroke, he should have summoned an ambulance and have laid her down with her head back to keep her airway open. If she were already unconscious when he arrived, he would not know what had led to her loss of consciousness and would not have been able confidently to diagnose a stroke. Shipman did not do what any sensible doctor would have done in the circumstances. Second, Shipman has sought to involve Mr Avery and Mr Swann in the death by suggesting that they could have had some information to impart as to the manner or cause of death. Even if it might be said that they were present at the moment of death, they were not present during the stroke that is supposed to have preceded it and it is misleading to suggest that they could have imparted any information about it.
Mrs Swann was a usually healthy woman who had died very suddenly. Dr Esmail said that it would not have been proper for Shipman to certify the death as being due to a stroke unless he had been present when it happened and had seen the signs. It is not clear that he had done so; certainly no record was made in Mrs Swann's medical notes. In my view, a referral to the coroner was called for.
Shipman made a most unusual remark soon after he had told Mr Swann that his mother had died. He suggested that he would wait for a while 'in case she
(
Mrs Swann
)
wakens up and frightens us all'. This remark is resonant of an event that occurred shortly before the death in 1979 of Mrs Alice Maude Gorton, who was, as I have found, probably killed by Shipman. Shipman brought Mrs Gorton's daughter to her mother's house and was in the process of telling her that her mother was dead and that a post-mortem examination would not be necessary, when Mrs Gorton emitted a loud groan. She was unconscious but not yet dead. She died two days later, without recovering consciousness. I think this event must have remained on Shipman's mind and may well account for the remark he made to Mr Swann.
Mrs Swann's appearance in death was entirely typical of that of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of diamorphine.
These matters, taken together, drive me to the conclusion that Shipman must have killed Mrs Swann. I feel able to say that I am sure of this conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001