The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Sidney Arthur Smith
Introduction
Mr Sidney Arthur Smith died at his home, 15 Garden Street, Newton, Hyde on Friday, 30th
August 1996 at the age of 76. He was a single man who lived with his brother, Mr Kenneth Ernest Smith, who was three years his junior and was himself soon to become a victim of Shipman. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was congestive cardiac failure.
In August 1998, following the early publicity surrounding the police investigation into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, a local taxi driver, Mr John Shaw, contacted the police. He expressed concern about the deaths of several of his former customers, including Mr Smith. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Stephen Frank Phelps and Mr David George Phelps (Mr Smith's nephews) and from Mrs Patricia Mary Phelps (Mr David Phelps' wife).
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Smith but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken additional statements from Mr Stephen Phelps and Mr David Phelps and has also taken statements from Mrs Sheila Irene Marshall (Mr Smith's niece), Mr Michael Cheetham and Mrs Joyce Cheetham (the son and daughter-in-law of Mr and Mrs Thomas Cheetham, who lived next door to Mr Smith and his brother, Kenneth) and Mr Neil Edwards (who worked as a window cleaner in Newton in 1996). Mr Stephen Phelps, Mrs Marshall and Mrs Patricia Phelps gave oral evidence at a hearing on Monday, 9th
July 2001. The Inquiry has had access to Mr Smith's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
Since the oral hearing, the Inquiry has received a statement from Mrs Alice Cheetham, the sister-in-law of Mr Thomas Cheetham.
Personal Background
Mr Stephen Phelps, Mr David Phelps and Mrs Marshall saw Mr Smith and his brother very regularly. Mr Sidney Smith was the more active. He ran the house, tended the garden and looked after his brother. He is described as a bright, cheerful man who rarely had a bad word to say about anyone.
Mr Smith was diabetic and followed a special diet. He suffered from swollen ankles and took tablets to combat water retention and hypertension. From July 1994, his medical records contain references to congestive heart failure. In May 1996, it was recorded that he had unstable angina, but the drug prescribed had unwanted side effects and was stopped. On 21st
May 1996, it is recorded that he had congestive heart failure and raised jugular venous pressure. The heart sounds were said to reveal a 'gallop' and there was a trace of oedema or swelling of the ankles.
The manuscript record for 5th
July 1996 (a Friday) indicated that Mr Sidney Smith had swollen ankles and was prescribed Lasix and enalapril together with another drug. The diagnosis was congestive heart failure and there was a note that the doctor would see him again the following Tuesday. That Tuesday, 9th
July, Mr Smith attended the surgery. The diagnosis was the same, although there were signs of some improvement. On 16th
July, there is an entry recording a repeat prescription of the drugs but no record of any examination. On 26th
July, Mr Smith attended the surgery and the record shows repeat prescriptions.
On 27th
August 1996, Mr Smith requested that Shipman visit him at home. The visits book records that he was suffering from swollen legs and could not walk; there is no mention of pain. The members of the family who gave evidence recall that Mr Kenneth Smith told them that Shipman had made an unannounced visit on that day to see his brother, who was out at the time. However, it is clear from the records that the visit was requested and also that Mr Sidney Smith was at home at the time. The handwritten medical record of that visit reads:
'CHF
oedema
knees
basal creps
LASIX 160 stat then 80mg OD
See FRI'
.
I interpret this to mean that Shipman diagnosed congestive heart failure with swelling of the legs up to the knees. He heard basal crepitations. Both of these are signs of congestive heart failure. Shipman prescribed 160mg of Lasix, a very large dose of a powerful diuretic, with the dose reducing to 80mg. He would visit three days later, 30th
August, the date of the death.
Despite the medical history disclosed by the records, Mr Smith is said by his family to have been active. He went regularly to Hyde to do his shopping and had been with the family for a day out to Southport on 20th
August. That visit is recorded in his notebook, an old diary in which he noted his outings and the items he bought. He noted shopping expeditions on 23rd
and 24th
August. There is no entry for 27th
August (the date on which Shipman visited) but shopping is recorded on 28th
August. Mr Stephen Phelps said in evidence that he took his Uncle Sidney shopping to Morrisons supermarket that day. His recollection is that his uncle had no difficulty in walking round the store and that he was not escorted there because he could not manage to go alone. On the following day, two items are listed, but crossed out and transferred to the list for 30th August. I infer that Mr Sidney Smith did not go shopping on 29th
August. In view of his request for a doctor's visit on the 27th
and the fact that he stayed at home on the 29th
, I think it likely that his mobility was impaired that week and that Mr Phelps took him shopping on the 28th
because he wanted to help him.
The Day of the Death
Mr Smith went shopping on the morning of 30th
August. There is microfiche evidence from Norweb that he paid an electricity bill in cash at about 10am at the Norweb shop in the centre of Hyde. I am satisfied that he went into Hyde alone that day. When alone, it was his usual practice to take the bus, although he would occasionally use a taxi.
It seems that, on his return, Mr Smith did some work on his garden gate. The window cleaner, Mr Edwards, saw him in the early afternoon, with a toolbox by his side. Mr Smith appeared well. Some time afterwards, Shipman called to see him.
The evidence as to what happened next is hearsay evidence, as Mr Kenneth Smith, who was present during Shipman's visit, died in December 1996, less than four months after his brother. Accordingly, the evidence comprises the recollections of members of the family of what Mr Kenneth Smith told them at the time. I have also considered Mrs Alice Cheetham's recollections of what Mrs Elsie Cheetham told her of the death.
Mr Kenneth Smith told the family that, when Shipman arrived, he, Kenneth, went into the kitchen to give his brother and the doctor some privacy in the living room. After about five minutes, Shipman came to the kitchen and said that Mr Smith was very ill and that he was going to send him to hospital. Shipman then went back into the adjoining living room and, after a very short time, came back into the kitchen and gestured towards Mr Smith who was sitting upright on the settee with his head on one side. Mr Smith looked as if he was asleep but in fact he was dead. Mr Kenneth Smith telephoned Mr David Phelps' home and Mr Phelps' wife, Patricia, answered. Mr Kenneth Smith was too upset to speak and Shipman took over the call. He told her that Mr Sidney Smith was dead, that he had died suddenly during Shipman's visit and he asked her to inform other members of the family. Shipman then went next door and asked Mr Thomas Cheetham to come and sit with Mr Kenneth Smith until the family arrived. He advised Mr Kenneth Smith what to do and then left.
Mrs Alice Cheetham recalls that Mrs Elsie Cheetham told her that she had been present in the Smiths' house at the time of Shipman's visit and the death of Sidney. However, I think she is almost certainly mistaken about this. Mr Kenneth Smith did not say to his family that Mrs Elsie Cheetham had been present.
Later, Mr Stephen Phelps and Mr David Phelps arrived at the house but, by the time they arrived, their uncle's body had been taken away. Mr Kenneth Smith was extremely distressed, not only at the death of his brother but also because Shipman had left him alone with his brother's body. The evidence of this distress and its cause is a further reason why I have concluded that Mrs Alice Cheetham's recollection is at fault.
The handwritten note which Shipman made about the visit is as follows:
'14.45 hrs
oedema
JVP
irregular heart beat
cyanosed
severe CHF
Admit
TGH
Speaking with brother - collapsed and
died 15.05 hrs
brother present'
.
I interpret this to mean that at 2.45pm Shipman found Mr Sidney Smith to have severe swelling of the legs, raised jugular venous pressure and a very irregular heartbeat. He noted blueness, probably of the lips. He diagnosed severe congestive heart failure and decided to admit him to Tameside General Hospital. While Shipman was speaking to Mr Kenneth Smith, Mr Sidney Smith collapsed and died. If the recorded findings are genuine, they would justify a diagnosis of severe congestive heart failure. The question is whether or not they are genuine.
The Aftermath
Mr Stephen Phelps spoke to Shipman about the death the following day. Shipman gave him an account of what had happened, which accorded with Mr Kenneth Smith's account. He said he had found Mr Smith in acute cardiac failure and was going to send him to hospital but he had died. Mr Stephen Phelps was not suspicious about the circumstances of his uncle's death. He knew that elderly people can die suddenly from heart failure and he was aware that his Uncle Sidney had shown some signs of heart failure in the previous months.
Certification
Shipman signed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), stating that death was due to congestive heart failure, which had begun two years earlier. He said that diabetes mellitus had contributed to the death.
On Form B of the cremation certificate, Shipman said that the death occurred at 3pm. That seems to be accurate. Shipman had a minor operations clinic that afternoon with appointments at 2pm and 2.30pm and then a break until afternoon surgery at 3.45pm. The visits book shows that he had to make two visits that afternoon. It is entirely possible that he arrived at Garden Street at about 2.45pm.
On Form B, Shipman also said that he had attended Mr Smith for seven days during his final illness. He said he saw the patient immediately before and immediately after death. He said that the mode of death was syncope of only seconds' duration. He claimed that the answers to the questions about the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and statements made by Mr Kenneth Smith. He claimed that Mr Kenneth Smith had nursed his brother during the last illness. He said that he and Mr Kenneth Smith were both present at the moment of Mr Smith's death. These statements are misleading. It is grossly misleading to suggest that Mr Kenneth Smith had nursed his brother during a last illness. If anything, it was Sidney who looked after Kenneth. It is also misleading to suggest that Mr Kenneth Smith was present at the death. He was in the house but was not present in the room so as to have any information to impart as to the cause or mode of death. These misleading statements are typical of those seen on many Forms B completed by Shipman in cases in which he has killed and sought to distance himself from the death by mentioning the names of others as having been present. In my view, it is plain that he was seeking to suggest that he was not alone with Mr Smith immediately before and at the time of his death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker found the death highly suspicious on account of the contents both of the cremation forms and of the medical records.
Conclusion
There is no doubt that Mr Smith was suffering from congestive heart failure during the months before his death and that he suffered an exacerbation of his symptoms in the last few days of his life. I think that he was having difficulty in walking on 27th
August and was only a little better on the following day. However, by 30th
August, I am satisfied that he was much better and was out and about in his usual way. I do not think he was in acute cardiac failure when Shipman arrived and Mr Kenneth Smith went into the kitchen. That he should have developed acute cardiac failure in the first few minutes of the consultation is theoretically possible but so unlikely that I regard the suggestion as fanciful. I am sure that Mr Sidney Smith did not have acute cardiac failure.
I am fortified in that view by the description given by Mr Kenneth Smith of Mr Smith's appearance in death, second-hand though that description is. Mr Kenneth Smith said that his brother was sitting upright in his chair, with his head to one side as if asleep. Dr John Grenville has said that a death from acute cardiac failure is a very distressing experience. The patient is gasping for breath and usually there are frothy secretions of blood and mucus coming from the mouth. Shipman's description of the death to Mr Stephen Phelps as 'simply dying' while his back was turned for a few moments does not ring true. As Dr Grenville has said, a cardiac death is not as easy as that. Mr Sidney Smith's appearance is entirely typical of Shipman's victims following death by diamorphine injection.
I am quite satisfied that Shipman's note in the medical records is a fabrication. It does not even ring true. If Shipman had indeed found Mr Smith in acute heart failure, he would have called for an ambulance and would have administered a strong diuretic. According to the note, he did not call an ambulance and he gave no treatment at all in the 20 minutes between his arrival and the death. This is not a credible account.
This death occurred while the patient was alone with Shipman. Shipman tried to conceal the fact that he was alone with Mr Smith by suggesting on Form B that Mr Kenneth Smith was present at the death. I do not think he was. Shipman made another false entry on Form B, claiming that Mr Smith had been nursed by his brother during his 'last illness'. On the evidence, there was no 'last illness'. These entries were designed to create the false impression that Mr Sidney Smith had been ill for some time and had required nursing. Shipman was giving the impression that this was not a sudden and unexpected death.
In my view, this was typical of cases in which Shipman has killed, almost certainly caused by the administration of a lethal dose of diamorphine. Shipman took advantage of Mr Kenneth Smith's absence in the kitchen to kill his brother. I am sure that this was an unlawful killing.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001