The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Kenneth Ernest Smith
Introduction
Mr Kenneth Ernest Smith died at his home, 15 Garden Street, Newton, Hyde on Tuesday, 17th
December 1996 at the age of 73. He lived alone. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Mr Smith disliked Shipman and considered him arrogant. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Smith's death was congestive heart failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
In August 1998, following early publicity surrounding the police investigation into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mr John Shaw, a local taxi driver, contacted the police. He expressed concern about the deaths of several of his former customers, including Mr Smith. The police investigated Mr Smith's death and took statements from Mr Stephen Frank Phelps and Mr David George Phelps, Mr Smith's nephews. The police also obtained a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Smith but an inquest into his death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from both nephews and has also taken a statement from Mrs Sheila Irene Marshall (Mr Smith's niece), Mr Michael Cheetham (the son of Mr Smith's next door neighbour, Mrs Elsie Cheetham) and Mr Neil Edwards (who worked as a window cleaner in the Garden Street area of Hyde in 1996). Mr Stephen Phelps and Mrs Marshall gave oral evidence at a hearing on Monday, 9th
July 2001. The Inquiry has had access to Mr Smith's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
Since the oral hearing, the Inquiry has received a statement from Mrs Alice Cheetham, the sister-in-law of Mr Thomas Cheetham (the husband of Mrs Elsie Cheetham).
Personal Background
Following the death of his brother, Mr Sidney Arthur Smith, whom Shipman killed on 30th
August 1996, Mr Kenneth Smith stayed on alone in the house they had shared at 15 Garden Street. Mr Kenneth Smith had suffered for many years from chronic ulceration of the legs, which were dressed regularly by the district nursing team. This was a very painful condition and, as a consequence, he was virtually housebound. Until August, his brother had cared for him. For some time after his brother's death, Mr Kenneth Smith was very upset. However, he was determined to remain in his own home, despite some pressure put upon him by Shipman to move into residential care or sheltered accommodation.
Mr Smith's nephews, Mr Stephen Phelps and Mr David Phelps, and his niece, Mrs Sheila Marshall, visited him regularly. They arranged for the installation of a stairlift and a powered reclining chair, which allowed Mr Smith to stand up more easily. His neighbours, Mr and Mrs Cheetham from number 17, brought him food and kept a close eye on him. However, Mr Thomas Cheetham died on 4th
December 1996, following a visit from Shipman during which I have found that Shipman killed him. Mr Smith was greatly upset by this, as the two men had been good friends. After Mr Cheetham's death, Mr Smith began to refer to Shipman as the 'angel of death'. Mrs Elsie Cheetham continued to bring a cooked meal in for Mr Smith every day and kept him company. The family thought that, despite these upsets, Mr Smith had settled down and was looking forward to Christmas.
Apart from the chronic ulceration of his legs, Mr Smith was in quite good health. He had been diagnosed as having epilepsy in 1989 and took anticonvulsant medication at least until late 1993. The records do not mention either fits or anticonvulsant medication after that date. Mr Smith was also said by his family to suffer from indigestion, for which he usually took proprietary medicines. Apart from those conditions, and the occasional traumatic injury and chest infection, Mr Smith appears to have been generally fit until December 1996. He spent his days quietly at home watching television. He enjoyed the regular visits from Mrs Elsie Cheetham and from members of his family.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
On Monday, 9th
December 1996, Mr Smith received a visit from Shipman. The surgery visits book contains an entry in his name, which says: 'pain a lot'. There is no indication as to where the pain was. Mr Stephen Phelps was aware that his uncle had pain in the legs of variable intensity. I suspect that it may have been that pain which caused Mr Smith to summon Shipman on 9th
December.
The note of Shipman's visit for that day on the computerised record says:
'Congestive heart failure
oedema jvp up basal creps not well dyspnoea sleeps sat up'
.
A fuller note is found behind the above note, which continues:
'tiried
(
sic
)
enalapril 2.5 increase to 10 lasix 40 see next tues'
.
I interpret that to indicate that Shipman diagnosed congestive heart failure on the basis of swelling (almost certainly intended to mean swelling of the ankles), raised jugular venous pressure, basal crepitations, shortness of breath and a history of feeling unwell and having to sleep sitting up. Those signs and symptoms, if present and honestly reported, would be indicative of congestive heart failure, although it would be usual to see a blood pressure reading, a pulse rate and an assessment of heart sounds as part of such an examination. It then appears that Shipman decided either to start Mr Smith on 2.5mg of enalapril per day and to increase the dose to 10mg per day or to increase Mr Smith's existing dosage of enalapril from 2.5mg to 10mg. As the records do not contain any previous reference to Mr Smith having been prescribed enalapril or of having had a condition that would have called for it, it may be that the first interpretation is correct. What is clear is that Shipman claimed also to have prescribed 40mg of Lasix per day. He expressed an intention to visit the following Tuesday, which would be eight days later. Lasix is a strong diuretic and would be appropriate for the treatment of congestive heart failure.
There are several reasons why I suspect that this is not an honest record of the visit of that day. Mr Stephen Phelps said that he was not aware that his uncle ever suffered from swollen ankles, other than the swelling associated with the leg ulceration. Nor did his uncle ever complain to him of shortness of breath. He did accept that, after he had obtained his new reclining chair, Mr Smith sometimes slept in it. As Mr Phelps understood matters, this was not because his uncle could not sleep comfortably lying down, but was because sometimes he could not be bothered to go upstairs to bed. I do recognise that members of a family do not always know everything about the health of their relatives, but I think Mr Stephen Phelps, who is a qualified nurse, took a closer than usual interest in his uncle's health. I think he would probably have known if his uncle had breathing difficulties, especially if they were of such severity that he could not breathe when lying down. I note also that Shipman left Mr Smith without making any arrangements for him to be monitored by the district nursing service and did not propose to see him for eight days. I find that strange as, if Mr Smith was as ill as the note suggests, the doctor should have revisited him much sooner. For those reasons, this record should not be taken at face value. However, it has been established that the record was not a late invention. Examination of the audit trail within the computer has shown that it was made on 9th
December. Notwithstanding that, I still regard this record with suspicion.
Mr Stephen Phelps visited his uncle on Sunday, 15th
December 1996. Mr Smith showed Mr Phelps some new 'blood pressure' tablets, and expressed surprise that the pharmacy had arranged for them to be delivered to his home. He gave the impression that he had not yet started taking them and Mr Phelps encouraged him to do so. These were enalapril, which Shipman had prescribed on the Monday of that week. These tablets are prescribed for mild congestive heart failure. Mr Phelps thought his uncle was in his usual state of health. The two men talked about arrangements for Christmas.
The Day of the Death
The evidence about the day of Mr Smith's death, Tuesday, 17th
December, comes in part secondhand from Mr Stephen Phelps and Mrs Marshall; they were given an account of events by Mrs Elsie Cheetham, who died not long afterwards. Mrs Alice Cheetham was also given an account of the death by Mrs Elsie Cheetham. Her recollection differs from that of Mr Phelps and Mrs Marshall. Mrs Alice Cheetham is now 83 and she admits that her memory is not good. I have seen Mr Phelps and Mrs Marshall in the witness box and am confident that their recollection is clear and reliable. I rely on their accounts.
Mrs Elsie Cheetham used to take Mr Smith's lunch round at about midday and then collect his empty plate half an hour or so later. She told the family that she had followed her usual routine on 17th
December. Mr Smith seemed fine and ate his lunch as usual. He is said to have had a good appetite. Mr Edwards had become friendly with the Cheetham and Smith families. He cleaned the windows that afternoon. On arriving at Mrs Cheetham's house, he cleaned her front windows, then Mr Smith's, and then went round the back of the houses. He had an arrangement with Mr Smith that he would come into the kitchen for clean water at that stage. On this occasion, when Mr Edwards went into the kitchen, he saw Mr Smith sitting in a chair in the living room, apparently asleep. He thought Mr Smith did not look well. He did not attempt to touch or speak to him but went round to fetch Mrs Cheetham. They both went back to the house and discovered that Mr Smith was dead. Mrs Cheetham telephoned Shipman, who came round soon afterwards. Although Mr Edwards recollects that he found Mr Smith at about 1.30pm, in my view it was probably some time after 3pm. That is the time estimated by Mrs Cheetham when she told the family of these events afterwards. She had been out to play bingo after lunch and was back at home when Mr Edwards asked her to look at Mr Smith.
Mr David Phelps was not told of the death until mid-afternoon. Mr Stephen Phelps was not contacted until about 5pm. The family assembled at the house and had all arrived by about 6.15pm. Mr Smith's body was still in the house and the undertakers had not yet arrived. Mr Stephen Phelps said that Mr Smith was sitting in his chair, as though asleep. His head was slightly forward and his tongue was out. He was blue around the lips. Dr Grenville is of the opinion that this position would not be usual for a patient who had died of congestive heart failure.
Although none of the witnesses knew this at the time and did not discover it until the police investigated Mr Smith's death, it is clear that Shipman had visited Mr Smith that day. His visit is recorded in the computerised medical records and in the cremation forms. The intention to revisit is shown in the visits book. The computerised records contain a brief note of the visit and a more detailed one. Detective Sergeant John Ashley established that these entries were made just before 3.45pm that afternoon.
The fuller version reads:
'oedema little changed gallop rhythm liver up jvp up clinically in severe failure refuses 999 says will die in hosital
(
sic
)
agrees to listen to geriatrician arrange D/V asap'
.
I interpret this to mean that Shipman found the ankles still swollen, the pulse or heart rate very fast, the liver palpable below the rib cage and the jugular venous pressure raised. It is to be inferred that Shipman told Mr Smith that he should be admitted to hospital but Mr Smith refused, saying that he would die there if he were made to go in. Shipman had asked if Mr Smith would agree to a visit from a geriatrician (who might, I suppose, seek to persuade him to be sensible) and Mr Smith agreed to listen. Shipman proposed to arrange a domiciliary visit as soon as possible. Meanwhile it appears that he was prepared to leave Mr Smith without any care or supervision and without any treatment.
There is a further computerised entry in the medical records, which was made early the following morning. This shows that Shipman had attended to see the body, presumably before the family had arrived. Shipman did not tell the family or, it appears, Mrs Elsie Cheetham, that he had visited Mr Smith shortly before his death.
Certification
Shipman completed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), stating that the death was due to congestive heart failure due to ischaemic heart disease. He said that the heart failure had begun seven to ten days before death. That would fit in with the consultation on 9th
December. However, he also claimed that the ischaemic heart disease had begun 12 to 18 months earlier. The medical records contain no support for that statement. The first mention of any heart problem was on 9th
December, only eight days before the death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. The time of death is given as
'About 16.00 hrs'
, although this appears to have been changed from
'About 14.00 hrs'
, and Shipman claims to have last seen Mr Smith alive about two hours before death, which, on his timings, would be at 2pm. That seems to me to be about the time he must have visited Mr Smith. Mrs Cheetham would have been at bingo and would not have seen his car. Shipman also claims to have attended Mr Smith for six to nine months during his 'last illness'. As the last illness was supposed to be related to the congestive heart failure, the medical records do not support this claim. The mode of death is given as syncope lasting seconds and this information is said to be based upon Shipman's own observations. Shipman must have intended to suggest that this was what he assumed had been the mode of death, as he later stated that no one was present at the moment of death. He indicated that Mr Smith was found dead by a neighbour bringing in his tea. This does not accord with Mr Edwards' evidence or what the Phelps family was told. However, it is fair to say that Mr Michael Cheetham, Mrs Cheetham's son, appears to have been given this account by someone, probably his mother.
The Aftermath
Mr Stephen Phelps made himself responsible for clearing Mr Smith's house. He took special care to dispose of unused medication. He found his uncle's enalapril but did not find any Lasix. In my view, it is unlikely that Shipman ever prescribed Lasix for Mr Smith.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker found the death highly suspicious on account of the contents of the cremation forms and moderately suspicious on account of the contents of the medical records.
Conclusion
Mr Smith was in normal health between Shipman's visit on 9th
December and the day of his death. He appeared well when Mrs Elsie Cheetham saw him only a few hours before his death.
The death was discovered a short time after Shipman had visited on 17th
December. No one saw Mr Smith alive or spoke to him after Shipman's departure. Although Shipman admitted on the MCCD and Form B that he had visited on the day of Mr Smith's death, he did not tell the family.
It appears to me highly unlikely that Mr Smith died from congestive heart failure. There is no history of any heart disease in his medical records until 9th
December 1996, eight days before his death. The records then suggest quite a severe state of heart failure of which the family was unaware. The entry in the records for that day does not ring true, for the reasons I have outlined above. Additionally, it appears that there never was a prescription for Lasix. I believe this record was a fabrication.
In my view, the record for the day of the death was also fabricated. If Mr Smith was as ill as the record suggests, it is unlikely that he would have eaten his usual lunch. If Mr Smith was as ill as Shipman suggested and was unwilling to go to hospital, Shipman would not have left him in that condition without making some provision for his care. Faced with the situation Shipman claimed existed, the doctor would have sought permission to contact a relative who might persuade the patient to change his mind or at least come round to care for him. Shipman did none of those things but simply walked away, claiming to have decided that he would arrange a domiciliary visit. This record does not ring true.
Shipman's claim on the MCCD that Mr Smith had ischaemic heart disease for 12 to 18 months before his death is not borne out by the records. Also, the claim that he attended Mr Smith for six to nine months during his 'last illness' is false. As Mr Smith is supposed to have died from heart failure, Shipman is implying that the last illness was at least connected with the heart. Yet there was no history of heart disease.
I have said that I believe the medical record entry for 9th
December was fabricated. It was undoubtedly made on 9th
December. The inference I am bound to draw is that Shipman was laying the ground for an opportunity to kill Mr Smith and to pass it off as death from heart failure. The entry for the day of the death and the false entries on the MCCD and in Form B were designed to provide support for the claimed cause of death.
There is no basis for any suggestion that Mr Smith might have died a sudden death from some cause other than heart failure. Nothing in his medical records suggests that he was at an increased risk of any of the conditions that might lead to sudden death.
Mr Smith's appearance in death and the circumstances surrounding it were not typical of death from heart failure and were entirely typical of a death caused by Shipman by the administration of diamorphine.
I am sure that Shipman killed Mr Smith, almost certainly by his usual method of injecting diamorphine. Mr Smith had survived his brother by less than four months.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001