The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
John Stone
Introduction
Mr John Stone died at his home, 297 Dukinfield Road, Hyde on Wednesday, 24th
April 1996 at the age of 77. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He thought highly of Shipman, who certified that the cause of his death was congestive heart failure due to hypertension.
In October 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, an anonymous caller contacted the police and expressed concern as to the circumstances of Mr Stone's death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Detective Sergeant Ashley.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Stone but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Ronald Anthony Stone (Mr Stone's son) and Mrs Audrey Stone (Mr Ronald Anthony Stone's wife). The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Stone's general practitioner and hospital records, and to the appointments sheets, visits books and practice documents for the relevant period, as well as to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). The Inquiry has obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Stone was a widower who lived alone. He had assistance from home helps who called in each morning and at lunchtime. Mr and Mrs Ronald Stone lived not far away and ran a public house. Mrs Stone visited her father-in-law each afternoon at teatime and would sometimes take him back to the public house for the evening.
Dr Grenville, who has examined the medical records, advised that Mr Stone's health had not been good for some time. He was found to be hypertensive in 1975. An x-ray taken in 1989 had revealed degenerative disease of the lumbar spine. In 1991, he was found to have an aneurysm of the abdominal aorta, but did not undergo surgery. It then appears that Shipman diagnosed congestive heart failure in February 1994, but there is nothing in the records to substantiate this diagnosis. Mr Stone was treated with various medications for this condition. In April 1994, Shipman diagnosed chronic renal failure and Mr Stone was referred to Dr O M P Jolobe, consultant geriatrician, who confirmed the diagnosis. Dr Jolobe suggested that this condition was exacerbated by the medication that Mr Stone was taking at the time. Dr Jolobe made no reference to congestive heart failure. Within the Lloyd George card envelope, there is a handwritten record of what appears to be a telephoned report of an echocardiogram dated 16th November 1994. In Dr Grenville's view, there is no record of significant cardiac failure in that report.
In February 1996, Mr Stone fell and broke his hip. He was admitted to Tameside General Hospital and underwent surgery. After that, he suffered a severe exacerbation of his renal failure. Ultrasound investigations showed enlargement of the prostate gland and significant damage to the kidneys and ureters, caused by obstruction. A long-term urinary catheter was inserted. On discharge, on 20th
March, the hospital asked Shipman to take a blood sample every week to monitor his renal function. From this time, Mr Stone was not very mobile and used a Zimmer frame.
The Day of the Death
The visits book for 24th
April 1996 suggests that Shipman was due to see Mr Stone on the day of his death as a 'revisit', probably for the taking of a blood sample, as had happened the previous week.
Mrs Stone visited her father-in-law at his house at about 1pm to find that his home help, Kath, who brought his lunch, was still there. Mrs Stone stayed for a cup of tea and a chat. Mr Stone mentioned that Shipman was due to see him that afternoon to collect a sample of blood and Mrs Stone recalls that he was in good spirits. At about 2.30pm, Mr Stone said that he felt tired and would like to 'doze' before Shipman arrived. Mrs Stone recalls that, as she and Kath left the house, she called to him to say that she was shutting the door and said, 'You will let the doctor in, won't you - you won't be asleep?' Mr Stone told her not to worry and said that Shipman would bang on the window if he were sleeping.
At about 3pm, Mr Ronald Stone was at home when his father telephoned him to say that he had forgotten to ask Mrs Stone to buy him a bottle of milk. At that stage, he seemed his 'usual self'.
At 3.40pm, Mr Ronald Stone received a telephone call from one of the receptionists at Shipman's surgery, who asked him to go to his father's house as his father had died. She told him that Shipman was at the house. Mr Ronald Stone went straight to his father's house and arrived within about five minutes. He walked through the open front door and into the sitting room, where he saw his father sitting in his usual chair, facing the window which looked out onto the road. He was wearing a shirt with the sleeves rolled up to the elbow, which was usual for him. He was upright, with his head slightly down. Shipman, who was standing next to the body, said something like,
'Don't worry, he has had a good life'
. Shipman also said that Mr Stone had died of heart failure and that there would be no need for a post-mortem examination because he had been present at the moment of death. Shipman left within minutes of Mr Ronald Stone's arrival and took his case with him.
Shipman's inadequate and undated handwritten record of the events of the day of Mr Stone's death simply reads:
'1
a) CHF
b) Hypertension
2 Chronic Renal Failure'
.
The computerised record is similar. It reads:
'O/E dead
chf bp chr renal failure'
.
Where a deceased person has undergone surgery within 12 months before the death, there is a requirement that the death must be reported to the coroner. It appears that Shipman reported the death to the coroner because Mr Stone had undergone surgery in February 1996. The Inquiry is in possession of a brief report to the coroner which records that Mr Stone was:
'Found dead in chair. History of renal
failure and cong and hypertension. Had
fractured femur in Feb but made a complete
recovery and was fully mobile'
.
In the light of that information, it appears that the coroner decided not to call for a post-mortem examination. The family was unaware of, and was not involved in, this referral to the coroner.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD on 24th
April 1996. He claimed that he had last seen Mr Stone alive on 17th
April. The medical records confirm that Shipman did see Mr Stone on that day, but the question arises whether that was the last occasion or whether Mr Stone was still alive when Shipman arrived at his house on 24th
April.
The cause of death was said to be congestive heart failure, which was due to hypertension. Shipman said that Mr Stone had had congestive heart disease for four years and hypertension for 12 years. He also certified that chronic renal failure had contributed to the death, but was not related to the congestive heart failure. On the reverse side of the MCCD, Shipman said that he had discussed the death with the coroner, and on the front side, that no post-mortem examination was to be held.
Mr Stone was buried, so there are no cremation documents.
The Aftermath
Mrs Stone blamed herself for her father-in-law's death and decided to visit Shipman to find out more about the circumstances surrounding his death. When she told Shipman that she felt guilty, he said to her words to the following effect:
'Listen to me, your father-in-law had a good life. You used to give him his tea and take him up to the pub until recently when he had his operation. He died peacefully. Don't worry, there was nothing you could have done. He wasn't getting any better. How do you think I feel? I've found quite a few just like your father lately, in their chair'
.
Mrs Stone asked Shipman how he got into the house, because she could remember banging the door shut behind her when she left her father-in-law. Shipman told her that Mr Stone would always leave the door on the latch when expecting a visit from the doctor. Mrs Stone does not feel sure that, if her father-in-law had dozed off after she had left him, he would have remembered to get up and leave the door on the latch for Shipman.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville has told the Inquiry that the medical evidence suggests that Mr Stone's death was caused by action on the part of Shipman rather than due to natural causes, principally because there was no recorded history to suggest that his death was expected.
Professor Richard Baker assessed this death to be moderately suspicious following his consideration of the medical records.
Conclusion
There are several highly suspicious features to Mr Stone's death.
The first and most obvious is the temporal association between Shipman's visit and the death. Shipman claimed to have found Mr Stone dead in his chair at about 3.30pm. I infer that from the time of Shipman's receptionist's telephone call to Mr Ronald Stone. Mr Stone had been well enough to telephone his son about his milk supplies just over half an hour before. It would be something of a coincidence if Mr Stone had died a sudden but natural death within that short period of time. That in itself is highly suspicious.
If, as Mr Ronald Stone recalls, Shipman told him that he had been present at the moment of death, the inconsistency between that account and what Shipman told the coroner would give rise to further suspicion. However, I think it likely that Mr Ronald Stone's recollection is at fault on this issue, as his wife seems to have been under the clear impression that Shipman found Mr Stone dead when he arrived at the house. Mrs Stone wanted to know how Shipman had gained access to the house, if Mr Stone had not let him in. Shipman's claim that the door had been left open for him seems rather improbable and is a further ground for suspicion.
The medical evidence does not support a death by natural causes. There is no corroboration of Shipman's diagnosis that Mr Stone suffered from congestive heart failure. Whilst it must be accepted that Mr Stone was suffering from renal failure, this condition does not lead to sudden death. Death follows a gradual decline. The course of events was not consistent with a death from congestive heart failure. Mr Stone was quite well in the hours before his death and spoke to his son less than an hour before his death.
Shipman was obliged to refer this case to the coroner because Mr Stone had recently undergone surgery. However, the way in which the referral was made seems to me to have been designed to ensure that the coroner did not send the body for a post-mortem examination. Shipman appears to have assured the coroner that this would not be necessary. I think Shipman wished to avoid a post-mortem examination.
The purpose of Shipman's visit was to take a blood sample. From my experience of other cases, I have come to realise that Shipman quite often used the occasion of taking a blood sample as an opportunity to give a lethal injection. Many patients do not watch the doctor while a blood sample is being drawn and some would not realise the difference between the administration of an injection and the taking of a blood sample even if they watched. Taking a blood sample gave Shipman an opportunity to introduce a needle into the patient's vein. I think that is what happened here.
When these factors are considered together, I am sure that Shipman killed Mr Stone, by administering a lethal injection of opiate under the guise of taking a blood sample.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001