The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Edith Scott
Introduction
Mrs Edith Scott, a widow, died at her home, 155 Dowson Road, Hyde on Thursday, 13th
April 1995 at the age of 85. She had been a patient of Shipman since he first came to Hyde in 1977 and followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified the cause of her death as coronary thrombosis.
In August 1998, Mrs Scott's niece, Mrs Rosemary Fenlon, contacted the police to express her concern over the circumstances of her aunt's death. The police investigated the death and obtained statements from Mrs Caroline Mary Leach (Mrs Scott's daughter), Mrs Rosemary Joan Fenlon (Mrs Scott's niece), Mrs Kathleen Anne Clarke (Mrs Scott's former cleaner), Mr Lee Stuart Adams (one of Mrs Scott's neighbours) and PC Michael Levy.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing Mrs Scott's death but an inquest into her death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has obtained statements from Mrs Fenlon and her husband, Peter. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Scott's general practitioner and hospital records, and to appointments sheets, visits books and other contemporaneous documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Scott was a retired deputy headmistress. By all accounts, she was an intelligent, independent and confident woman. She had lived alone since the death of her husband, but was on close and affectionate terms with her daughter, Mrs Leach, who lived some distance away. She was also close to her niece, Mrs Fenlon. Mrs Scott's former cleaner, Mrs Clarke, worked for her once a week but used to call in three or four times a week, usually about lunchtime. Mrs Clarke described Mrs Scott as being a frail elderly lady.
Mrs Scott had enjoyed good health all her life. In particular, her medical records show no sign that she suffered from any form of heart disease. In late January 1995, Mrs Scott suffered an attack of shingles. The medical records confirm this. Zovirax was prescribed. In early February, Mrs Leach came to Hyde to look after her mother and stayed until about 24th
February. Shipman's surgery visits book suggests an intention to visit on 10th
February but there is no entry in the medical records for that day. The records suggest that, on either 13th
or 14th
(probably 13th
) February, Shipman visited and found Mrs Scott better. On 24th
February, there is an entry in the visits book which reads:
'shingles - no better after Treatment'
. The records show that Shipman visited that day and diagnosed post-herpetic neuralgia for which he prescribed amitriptyline. Shingles is a herpetic disease. Mrs Leach recalls that, while she was staying in Hyde, her mother suffered an adverse reaction to some tablets prescribed by Shipman. They made her drowsy and caused her to vomit. Mrs Leach telephoned the surgery and, in the early afternoon, Shipman arrived at the house. He examined Mrs Scott and told Mrs Leach that her mother had had a bad attack of shingles. He also observed that her heart was 'fine'. The medical records are not entirely consistent with Mrs Leach's recollections.
On 17th
March, Shipman revisited Mrs Scott. The handwritten medical note records that her shingles was better, though she had indigestion and was still weak. On 31st
March, there was another revisit. Amitriptyline was prescribed again for post-herpetic neuralgia.
There is no record to suggest that Shipman saw Mrs Scott again until the day of her death. Mrs Leach spoke to her mother regularly by telephone and Mrs Scott did not mention any specific health problems. Nor was Mrs Fenlon aware of any deterioration in her aunt's health.
The Day of the Death
On Thursday, 13th
April, the day of Mrs Scott's death, Mrs Clarke called at Mrs Scott's house at about 1pm. Her recollection is that she met Mrs Scott on the garden path and Mrs Scott told her that she had just been to the doctor's, as she did not feel at all well. She said she wanted to sit down and have a rest. She looked pale and tired. There is no record at the surgery of an appointment for Mrs Scott that day, although it is clear from the medical records that Shipman saw Mrs Scott that day. The use of the letter V denoting 'visit' in the handwritten record clearly suggests that Shipman visited Mrs Scott at home. The computerised record is less clear. That Shipman intended to visit her at home that day is confirmed by an entry in the visits book, but no reason is shown for the visit. Thus, whilst it is possible that Mrs Scott went to the surgery on the day of her death, it seems far more likely that any consultation which took place that day did so at her home. I think it likely that, when Mrs Clarke met Mrs Scott, Mrs Scott said that she wanted to see the doctor and did not say that she had already seen him. It is worth noting that the visits book for 13th
April contains an entry for another patient who lived in the same road as Mrs Scott.
Mrs Clarke's recollection is that she and Mrs Scott went into the house together. Mrs Scott took her coat off and sat in her usual chair in the back living room. Mrs Clarke asked if she could get Mrs Scott anything but Mrs Scott said that she just wanted to have a sleep. Mrs Clarke left.
Mrs Clarke returned to Mrs Scott's house in the late afternoon. She knocked on the front door but there was no reply. She went to the back of the house and, through the window, she could see Mrs Scott but could not attract her attention. She went next door for Mr Adams, who lived there. He managed to enter the house through a window. He found Mrs Scott sitting in the chair in which Mrs Clarke had left her earlier. Her head had fallen on to her chest and had slumped to one side. The lights and the television were on.
Mr and Mrs Fenlon came to the house. They noticed that Mrs Scott's hair and clothing were completely tidy. There was staining, probably vomit but possibly saliva, on her chin, her clothing and the carpet. Next to her, within easy reach, was a telephone. There was also a cup of tea and a saucer that appeared to have fallen to the floor.
A police officer, PC Levy, arrived in response to a call timed at 6.35pm and summoned Shipman. When Shipman arrived, he did not examine Mrs Scott. He squatted in front of her on the floor and looked at her. He was very brusque with Mrs Fenlon, who was extremely distressed.
The handwritten medical record for the day of death states:
'V
(
visit
)
c/o
(
complaining of
)
chest pain angina central
Sweaty pulse 80/- HS I II
130/80 Pain for 2 hours on/off
(
illegible, possibly
woke o/u
)
last night
? Angina? CT. not happy hospital
rest
review Saturday'
.
I interpret this entry to suggest that Shipman had visited Mrs Scott at home. She had complained of central chest pain, possibly typical of angina. She was sweaty. Her pulse rate was 80 beats per minute. The heart sounds were normal. Blood pressure was 130/80. She had had pain for two hours on and off. The next part is difficult to decipher but appears to say that she had woken in the night. Shipman made diagnoses of possible angina and possible coronary thrombosis. He recorded that Mrs Scott was unwilling to go to hospital. He advised her to rest a lot and decided to review her on the Saturday. As 13th
April was a Thursday, he proposed to leave her alone for two days.
The corresponding entry in the computerised records reads as follows:
'Home visit admin
Chest pain
see notes review sat
(
Saturday
)
tluk
(
to let us know
)
'
.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). He mistakenly gave Mrs Scott's age as 75. He certified the cause of death as coronary thrombosis, which had supposedly commenced
'? 12 hours'
before death. He said that he had last seen Mrs Scott alive on the day of her death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that death had occurred at
'About 1700 hours'
and that he had last seen Mrs Scott alive eight hours before she died. That would mean that he had last seen her alive at about 9am. He said that he saw the body about two and a half hours after death and made a complete external examination. He said that the mode of death was syncope of seconds' duration. This must have been intended as pure surmise on Shipman's part as he said that no one had been present at the moment of death. In response to question 11, which queried the extent to which his views as to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations, Shipman wrote:
'OWN. FOUND BY HOME HELP
DUTY POLICE OFFICER PRESENT WHEN
ENTERED HOUSE.
FOUND SAY IN CHAIR. EST. TIME OF DEATH
17.30'
.
Some notes have been overwritten on this part of the cremation certificate by the police, who supplied it to the Inquiry.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker found the case highly suspicious on account both of the cremation forms and the medical notes and records.
Conclusion
There are a number of suspicious features surrounding this death.
Mrs Scott was 85 years old. The picture I have from the evidence is that she had been fit and independent until her attack of shingles in early 1995, but that from then onwards she became rather frail. She had no history of heart trouble. It is possible for a woman of 85 to die suddenly of a heart attack even without having exhibited any signs of heart disease. However, the fact that she should die of such an attack on a day when Shipman has visited her at home (not apparently in response to an urgent request to attend) arouses a significant degree of suspicion. If Mrs Scott had telephoned the surgery to request a visit, the usual practice would have been for the staff to record the reason for her request. If the request had been urgent, it would have been most unusual for the staff not to record the reasons. No reason is recorded. There is a real possibility that Shipman had seen Mrs Scott in the road when he was on his way to visit his other patient nearby. They might have spoken to each other; she might have said that she was not feeling well and he might have promised to visit her later that afternoon. To a large extent these suggestions are supposition, but they are feasible and are not untypical of Shipman's conduct in other cases.
The only evidence that Mrs Scott suffered a heart attack on 13th
April comes from Shipman's own note. I am bound to treat that note with some suspicion, as there are many cases in which Shipman has made false or exaggerated entries in the records of patients he has killed. I find the suggestion that Mrs Scott was suffering from chest pain on that day to be implausible. There is evidence from Mrs Clarke that Mrs Scott was looking pale and feeling tired that day, but I think that Mrs Scott would have said that she had chest pain if that had been so. Moreover, I am confident that she would have telephoned her daughter and probably her niece if she had been suffering chest pain. I also find it implausible that Mrs Scott would have refused to go to hospital if Shipman had so advised, at least without speaking to her daughter. Shipman's entry in the records, suggesting that Mrs Scott had had a heart attack but had refused hospital admission and had died shortly afterwards, is typical of several cases in which I have found that he has killed the patient. In many respects, the circumstances of this death are entirely typical of cases in which Shipman killed.
The evidence of Mrs Clarke is puzzling. Mrs Clarke suggests that Mrs Scott had been to the surgery that morning under her own steam. That is possible, although it appears that, if she had, she had not seen Shipman. I am satisfied that Shipman visited Mrs Scott that day, although I have no means of knowing at what time. It is possible that Mrs Clarke is mistaken about the events of that day. After all, she was not asked to recall the details until more than three years later. If she were mistaken about meeting Mrs Scott outside the house, but correct in her recollection that Mrs Scott had said that she had already seen the doctor, her account would point to Shipman having visited before 1pm. That would mean that Mrs Scott was seen alive after Shipman had gone. If Mrs Clarke was correct about meeting her outside, but mistaken in recalling that Mrs Scott had said that she had already seen Shipman that day, her account would be consistent with a visit by Shipman after Mrs Clarke had left. He would then have had the opportunity to administer a lethal injection and leave Mrs Scott dead, to be found later that afternoon by Mrs Clarke and Mr Adams. In my view, the most likely explanation is that Mrs Scott had seen and spoken to Shipman while she was out that morning but had not yet had a consultation with him.
Mrs Scott's peaceful appearance is not typical of a death following a heart attack. Her appearance in death is very similar indeed to that of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by diamorphine injection. That Mrs Scott appears to have vomited shortly before death is consistent with death from heart attack or death from diamorphine injection. That a cup and saucer had been knocked over on the floor is consistent with death by heart attack or death by diamorphine.
There are some probable inaccuracies on Form B. In particular, Shipman suggested that he had last seen Mrs Scott alive at about 9am. Given what is known of Shipman's usual practice, and the appointments sheet for that day, it seems highly likely that he was in the surgery from 8.45am until about 11am. He would then usually do some paperwork before setting out on his rounds. It is possible that he could have visited Mrs Scott very early in the morning before surgery. If he did, there is no reason to suppose that he killed her, as Mrs Clarke says she saw Mrs Scott alive at about 1pm. If Shipman did not visit until after 1pm, which would be his usual visiting time, it would appear that he has made a false entry on Form B, which has had the effect of distancing him from Mrs Scott's death.
Finally, this was a sudden and unexpected death in the case of a lady with no history of heart disease. Shipman should have referred it to the coroner. The fact that he did not arouses some suspicion. However, it must be acknowledged that Shipman's attitude to the requirements of the law relating to the registration of deaths was cavalier, even in cases in which he cannot be suspected of criminal involvement. I cannot attach great weight to his failure to report this death to the coroner.
Taken together, these points are sufficient to persuade me that Shipman probably killed Mrs Scott by a lethal injection of diamorphine. However, there remains a possibility that she died a natural death and I cannot dismiss that as fanciful. For that reason, I cannot be sure of my conclusion. I find that Shipman was probably responsible for Mrs Scott's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001