The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Elizabeth Teresa Sigley
Introduction
Mrs Elizabeth Teresa Sigley died at her home, 49 Stockport Road, Gee Cross, Hyde on Thursday, 14th
December 1995 at the age of 67. She had been a patient of Shipman since January 1993. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to right ventricular hypertrophy due to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
In December 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Miss Heather Veronica Sigley (Mrs Sigley's daughter), expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her mother's death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Miss Sigley.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Sigley but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Miss Sigley and has had access to Mrs Sigley's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
At the time of her death, Mrs Sigley was living alone, although her daughter, a trained nurse, lived locally and saw her mother every day. Mrs Sigley had been unwell for about five years prior to her death, suffering from COPD. According to her daughter, Mrs Sigley was often short of breath and her condition was always worse in the winter. From September 1995, she experienced a marked decline in her health and it appeared to her daughter that she was constantly gasping for breath and frequently became cyanosed, which is a bluish discolouration of the extremities and lips resulting from an inadequate amount of oxygen in the blood.
The medical records confirm Miss Sigley's recollection. In January 1993, Shipman recorded that Mrs Sigley's peak flow was 280 litres per minute, which is significantly reduced, suggesting a significant degree of COPD. A chest x-ray taken in October 1995 also showed evidence of COPD, but the heart was not enlarged, which indicated that there was no right ventricular failure. The notes record that Mrs Sigley had a chest infection in October 1995, which Shipman diagnosed as bronchopneumonia and treated with flucloxacillin, an antibiotic.
In June 1995, Mrs Sigley was found to have a raised cholesterol level. After discussion with Mrs Sigley, Shipman decided not to treat it. In Dr Grenville's view this was probably a reasonable decision. This raised level may have placed Mrs Sigley at an increased risk of suffering a heart attack.
Miss Sigley did not share her mother's high opinion of Shipman and she had an altercation with him, which arose in the following circumstances. On Friday, 17th
November 1995, Mrs Sigley saw Shipman at the surgery, on account of continuing symptoms of COPD. He prescribed Ventolin and Pulmicort and recorded that air entry was equal on both sides and breath sounds were normal. He prescribed Fosamax for osteoporosis.
The following day, Mrs Sigley telephoned her daughter. She sounded distressed and was having difficulty breathing. Miss Sigley went to see her and saw that she was very cyanosed and struggling for breath. She telephoned Shipman, who was very dismissive. He said that he had only seen Mrs Sigley the previous day and that there was nothing wrong with her. Miss Sigley told Shipman that, if he did not attend, she would take her mother to casualty. Shipman agreed to attend. This exchange is recorded in the handwritten records as having taken place at 10.50am. Shipman noted that he asked Miss Sigley why, if her mother's condition had deteriorated, she had not
'got her act together and rung earlier'
. Miss Sigley felt that his attitude, as demonstrated by that comment, was unreasonable. Shipman seemed displeased that the call had not been made earlier that morning and may well have resented what he saw as Miss Sigley's unwarranted interference.
Shipman went to see Mrs Sigley. He noted in the medical records that he arrived at 12.10pm and that Mrs Sigley's daughter was present. Miss Sigley recalls that Shipman was surprised by her mother's condition and said that she had deteriorated since he last saw her. He apologised. He telephoned Tameside General Hospital and arranged for her immediate admission. Shipman made an extensive record of this consultation and concluded by noting that air entry was very poor and that Mrs Sigley had a chest infection for which she was to be referred to hospital.
Mrs Sigley remained in hospital for nearly a week and was discharged home on Friday, 24th
November 1995. The discharge letter from Dr M P Chopra, consultant physician, dated 8th December 1995, records a diagnosis of
'Respiratory failure type 1'
. He recommended that Mrs Sigley should have oxygen therapy via an oxygen concentrator for 14 hours a day. Dr Chopra had also prescribed inhaled bronchodilators, namely, salbutamol 200mg four times a day and Atrovent 40mg a day. The discharge letter referred to the fact that Mrs Sigley required maximum support from home services but stated that she should be capable of enjoying a comfortable life. It concluded with the following words:
'She has got an appointment to see me in 4 weeks time. We should avoid the use of respiratory depressants'
.
On 25th
November 1995, Shipman visited Mrs Sigley at home and, according to Miss Sigley, told her that she had only two years left to live. Shipman's handwritten note, the last he made in Mrs Sigley's records, notes the medication suggested by Dr Chopra, including the need for oxygen. He noted that she needed 24 hour constant care. Miss Sigley says that she thought Shipman's remarks about her mother's expectation of life were highly inappropriate. She says that she contacted Dr Chopra to ask him about her mother's prognosis. She says that Dr Chopra disagreed with Shipman's opinion and said that Mrs Sigley's COPD was not very serious; provided it was managed well she could maintain a good quality of life. However, when the police spoke to Dr Chopra in 1998, he told them that Mrs Sigley could have died at any time but, in all probability, would have survived for about two years. He said that her condition had stabilised following her admission to hospital.
The computerised medical records indicate that Shipman saw Mrs Sigley at home on 29th
November when an oxygen concentrator was fitted, and Mrs Sigley was said to be
'all ok'
. The records also show a visit on 6th December 1995 and Mrs Sigley's name appears in the visits book for that day. Miss Sigley says that her mother did not mention this visit. The entry in the computerised records reads:
'6/12/1995
had a chat to patient
o2 etc'
'Seen in own home
Dr HF Shipman'
.
This brief entry implies that Shipman saw Mrs Sigley at home and discussed her oxygen therapy.
Miss Sigley last saw her mother alive on Wednesday, 13th
December 1995 when she visited her mother and stayed for tea. They ate a meal together and talked about their plans for Christmas. Mrs Sigley appeared to be in good spirits and seemed to be getting used to her continuous supply of oxygen from a concentrator.
The Day of the Death
Miss Sigley spoke to her mother on the telephone at about midday on Thursday, 14th
December 1995. She sounded well and they talked about the possibility of obtaining a portable oxygen cylinder, which they could put into the car so that Mrs Sigley would be able to go out. Mrs Sigley did not mention feeling unwell.
Judging from the practice documents, Shipman did not have a busy day in the surgery that day. He was free for home visits between about 11am and 3.45pm except for an appointment at midday. According to the visits book, he had three visits to make, one of which was to a temporary resident at 40 Mottram Old Road, which is an extension of Stockport Road, where Mrs Sigley lived. Although Mrs Sigley's name is not in the visits book, it does appear in the acute prescriptions book in connection with a request for a portable oxygen cylinder. It would seem that Mrs Sigley or her daughter must have contacted the surgery in connection with their discussions earlier that day.
At some stage in the early evening, Miss Sigley remembers receiving a telephone call from her uncle, who expressed concern because Mrs Sigley was not answering her telephone. Miss Sigley was not particularly concerned about this. She thought her mother might have inadvertently disconnected the cable with her walking frame. She said she would call round to see her mother shortly.
Miss Sigley arrived at her mother's house at about 8pm. She unlocked the front door, which had a Yale type lock, and went into the room at the back of the house. She found her mother, dressed in her usual day clothes, seated in a chair. She appeared to be sleeping peacefully. Miss Sigley immediately realised, however, that her mother had died. Several factors struck her as unusual. First, her mother was not sitting in her favourite chair. Mrs Sigley had two chairs in the back room, one of which was a large mechanical chair, heavily padded with pillows, and the other a more upright Parker Knoll chair, which was not padded. Mrs Sigley always sat in the large mechanical chair and disliked the other, which she found uncomfortable. Second, the television was not on. Miss Sigley told the Inquiry that her mother always watched the 6pm news and thought that the television would have been on for the evening by the time she arrived. Miss Sigley did not mention this to the police when they investigated the death. Third, Mrs Sigley was not using her oxygen, upon which she was dependent for a large part of the day.
Miss Sigley telephoned Shipman at his home. A young man answered the telephone and explained that Shipman was not in. He said he would pass on the news of Mrs Sigley's death. Shipman arrived a short time later. On looking at Mrs Sigley, he turned to Miss Sigley and said,
'You're right, she is dead'
. Shipman asked Miss Sigley if she wanted a post-mortem examination to be carried out but she said that she did not.
The computerised entry in the general practitioner records for the day of the death simply reads:
'O/E-dead
2015 certified'
.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death, completed by Shipman, records that he last saw Mrs Sigley alive on 6th
December 1995. He certified that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis, which had lasted only seconds. This event was due to right ventricular hypertrophy, which Shipman said had been present for a month. That condition had been caused by chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, which, he said, had been present for ten years or more. There is nothing in Mrs Sigley's records to suggest that her condition had changed about a month before her death and nothing in Dr Chopra's discharge letter to suggest that Mrs Sigley had developed right ventricular failure. Miss Sigley says that she was surprised to see these conditions on the certificate but said nothing at the time because she was in too much shock.
Mrs Sigley was buried and there are no cremation papers.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker found the case moderately suspicious on the basis of the contents of the medical records.
In Dr Grenville's view, the position in which Mrs Sigley was found was inconsistent with her having died from coronary thrombosis. Second, Dr Grenville says that Mrs Sigley's medical history, as recorded in the notes, does not support the stated cause of death. In particular, there is nothing in the medical records to suggest that Mrs Sigley had right ventricular hypertrophy. Indeed, Dr Chopra's discharge letter to Shipman specifically states that a chest x-ray had shown the heart size to be normal. Dr Grenville says that, as Shipman did not suggest to Miss Sigley that he had seen her mother before her death, he could not have been aware of any signs or symptoms which might have led him to the diagnosis of a heart attack. He should have referred the case to the coroner.
Conclusion
There are some suspicious circumstances surrounding this death. Although Mrs Sigley was in poor health in late 1995, she was not thought to be terminally ill and was not expected to die when she did. She had no history of heart disease. I do, of course, accept that it is possible that she died of a heart attack without any prior warning. However, her death was sudden and unexpected.
If this was a natural death and if Shipman had not seen Mrs Sigley since 6th
December, as he claimed, he could not possibly have known the cause of her sudden death. The death should have been referred to the coroner, with a view to post-mortem examination. This should not have been a matter of choice for Miss Sigley. Shipman should have decided to refer and should have explained the reasons to Miss Sigley. That he appeared to offer Miss Sigley the opportunity to have a post-mortem examination, would appear to suggest that he was not seeking to avoid a referral. I suspect that he was anxious to avoid a post-mortem examination but wished to create the impression that it was Miss Sigley who had decided not to have one.
The cause of death which Shipman certified was probably not the true cause of death. Not only was there no indication in the medical records that Mrs Sigley suffered from heart disease such as would increase the risk that she would have a heart attack, there was no real evidence that she had right ventricular failure. Moreover, her position and appearance in death were not typical of what is seen following a heart attack.
In short, there are good reasons to suspect that Mrs Sigley's death was not natural.
There is no direct evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Sigley on 14th
December. He certainly had the opportunity to do so in the sense that he had time to visit her and would have been near to her home during the day. It is also likely that Shipman had Mrs Sigley in mind that day, as she or her daughter had telephoned the surgery to request the provision of a portable oxygen dispenser. It is quite possible that that telephone call acted as a prompt for a visit, which Shipman did not enter in his visits book and subsequently decided to conceal.
Why Mrs Sigley was found sitting in a chair that she did not like, some distance from her oxygen supply, is something of a mystery. It could be that she had let the doctor in and had sat there at his suggestion. However, I do not think I can attach much importance to that factor. However, I do regard it as significant that Mrs Sigley's appearance in death was not only untypical of that seen following death from a heart attack but was wholly typical of that of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of morphine or diamorphine.
Although the evidence falls some way short of that which would make me sure that Shipman killed Mrs Sigley, there are sufficient causes for suspicion to persuade me that Shipman probably visited her that day and killed her by giving an injection of opiate. Very little opiate would be needed to kill Mrs Sigley. Dr Chopra had advised that she must avoid any respiratory depressant, because her respiratory function was already quite severely compromised.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001