The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Lena Norah Slater
Introduction
Miss Lena Norah Slater died at her home, 10 Newton Hall Court, Hyde on Friday, 2nd
May 1997 at the age of 68. She had never married. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the breast.
On 26th
August 1998, Mr John Shaw, a taxi driver, expressed concern to the police about the deaths of a number of Shipman's patients, including that of Miss Slater. The police investigated her death and took statements from Mr Alfred Slater (her brother), and from Mrs Mary Wilson Taylor, Mrs Lily Smith and Mrs Doreen Brelsford (friends of Miss Slater), and from Detective Constable David Michael O'Brien. District Nurse Marion Gilchrist was interviewed by the police but a statement was not taken.
Shipman was not prosecuted in respect of Miss Slater's death but an inquest into her death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken an additional statement from Mr Slater. The Inquiry has also had access to Miss Slater's general practitioner and hospital records, and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. Miss Slater's telephone records have also been considered. In addition, the Inquiry has obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Throughout her life, Miss Slater was active in the community, involving herself in church affairs and helping charities, particularly St Ann's Hospice.
In February 1996, she was diagnosed as suffering from cancer of the left breast. By the time the diagnosis was made, the cancer was well advanced. During that year, she underwent chemotherapy, followed by mastectomy, followed by a course of radiotherapy. Her care was shared between the Christie Hospital in Manchester and Tameside General Hospital. She appeared to make a good recovery. However, early in 1997, cutaneous metastases were noted on the chest wall. This was a significant blow to Miss Slater, who realised that her prognosis was poor. She had another course of chemotherapy, but the disease continued to progress rapidly. On 7th
April 1997, Miss Slater told the doctors at Tameside that she did not wish to have further treatment as she had found the side effects of her recent treatment intolerable. At about this time, she gave her dog to Mrs Brelsford. Mrs Smith interpreted the fact that Miss Slater had given away her dog as an indication that she was 'putting her house in order' before she died. Mrs Brelsford told the police that Miss Slater was too sick to continue caring for her dog.
According to Mr Slater, Shipman visited his sister on a weekly basis, during and after her treatment. He says that the consultations took place at Miss Slater's home because she refused to go to the surgery. She apparently told her sister that she did not want to go to the surgery because 'he sees them off there'. The medical records and appointments sheets suggest that, after January 1997, Shipman usually saw Miss Slater at home.
On Wednesday, 30th
April, two days before Miss Slater died, she went shopping with Mrs Smith in Stockport. Together they caught the bus, spent an hour in Stockport and then returned to Mrs Smith's house. Mrs Smith recalls that Miss Slater did not look well, although she stayed until 7pm before catching a bus back home. She telephoned Mrs Smith shortly before 8pm to say that she had arrived.
The following day, 1st
May 1997, Miss Slater went with Mrs Taylor to the polling station to vote in the general election. Mrs Taylor last saw Miss Slater alive late that morning. During their time together that day, Miss Slater was very quiet and it was obvious to Mrs Taylor that she was not well. Mr Slater recalls talking to his sister over the telephone during the evening of 1st
May and recalls that she
'sounded the same as usual'.
The Day of the Death
At 8.36am on Friday, 2nd
May, Miss Slater telephoned Shipman's surgery. There is a visit request slip for that day in Miss Slater's Lloyd George folder, which says that she was
'not well'
.
Mrs Brelsford had a telephone conversation with Miss Slater on the day of her death. Telephone billing records show that Miss Slater and Mrs Brelsford spoke at 1.10pm. Miss Slater asked Mrs Brelsford not to come for her the following day, as she was going to have a rest. Mrs Brelsford recalls that the conversation was short and to the point, which was apparently characteristic of Miss Slater.
At some time that day, Shipman called at Mrs Taylor's house to tell her that he had found Miss Slater dead. Mrs Taylor thought that he arrived just before lunchtime. However, I think she must be mistaken. The very earliest time that Miss Slater could have been found dead was after she had spoken to Mrs Brelsford at 1.10pm. In fact, as I shall shortly explain, I think Shipman arrived at Mrs Taylor's house at about 3.30pm. Shipman asked Mrs Taylor to come back to Miss Slater's house with him to look for the addresses of her relatives. He told Mrs Taylor that he had called on Miss Slater earlier. He had wanted her to go into a home and had left the house in order to use another telephone, as he did not want her to hear him making arrangements for her to go into a home. He said that, when he returned to the house, he had found her dead.
Together, Shipman and Mrs Taylor returned to the house. Miss Slater was lying on the bed, covered up. She looked very peaceful, as though she was asleep. Shipman then telephoned Mr Slater in Mrs Taylor's presence. From the billing records, it can be seen that that was at 3.42pm. Shipman told Mr Slater that his sister had died and asked him to come to the house. At some stage, either on the telephone or later face to face, Shipman told Mr Slater that he had visited Miss Slater earlier that day, that she was unwell and he had persuaded her to go to St Ann's Hospice for the weekend. He said that he had left the house in order to make the necessary arrangements and, when he returned, she was dead.
Mrs Taylor spoke to Mrs Brelsford at about 4pm and told her of Miss Slater's death. She said that Shipman had visited Miss Slater and had gone to use the telephone to arrange for her to be admitted to The Sycamores, an elderly persons' residential home. Mrs Brelsford was certain that Miss Slater would not have agreed to that.
There are differences between the explanations that Mrs Taylor and Mr Slater recall being given by Shipman. The difference is not only as to the institution that Shipman had intended Miss Slater to go to, but also as to whether he had discussed the possibility with her or whether it was to remain a secret. These differences may have arisen because Shipman gave different accounts, but it could also be that the witnesses' recollections are imperfect. Enquiries of The Sycamores residential home and St Ann's Hospice have proved inconclusive and it is unclear whether Shipman contacted either institution. It is very unlikely that he did.
When Mr Slater arrived at the house, he went into his sister's bedroom, where he saw her lying on her right hand side, facing the wall with her back to the room. She was fully clothed and wearing a hat, as she had done in recent weeks to cover her hair loss. Mr Slater had previously been a patient of Shipman and knew him quite well. He says that, on that day, Shipman seemed to be different from his usual character. When Mr Slater expressed shock at the suddenness of his sister's death, Shipman said quite brusquely that his sister was 'riddled with cancer'.
If Shipman left Miss Slater alive at the end of his first visit and if he was able to gain access to the house when he arrived later to find her dead, the door must have been left unlocked for him. There is conflicting evidence between Mr Slater and Mrs Taylor as to whether Miss Slater would have allowed Shipman to leave the door unlocked if he left the premises to make arrangements for her care. Mr Slater says that Shipman told him that his sister had left the door on the latch for him when he went out. Mr Slater thinks his sister would not have done that and suspects that Shipman was lying. Mrs Taylor says that Miss Slater was in the habit of leaving the Yale lock with the catch up when she was expecting a visit from Shipman. I cannot resolve this dispute, although I observe that Mrs Taylor probably saw Miss Slater more frequently during the day and might well have known more of her habits.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), stating that the cause of death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the breast. There is little doubt that Miss Slater would have died of those causes before long. The question is whether she died of those causes on that day, or whether her death was hastened by the administration of a lethal dose of strong opiate.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that the death occurred at
'About 15.00'
, although it appears that he had first written
'13.00'
and changed the
'3'
to
'5'
. He said that he last saw Miss Slater alive about two hours before her death and saw the body about 20 minutes after death, at which time he carried out a complete external examination. So, he was saying that he was at the house at about 1pm, which would be before or at about the time of Miss Slater's conversation with Mrs Brelsford. He said that the mode of death was coma of only minutes' duration. When asked to what extent his answers to the questions relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others, he wrote:
'Neighbour Mrs'
. He said that Miss Slater had been nursed during her last illness by
'D/N. M Gilcrest'
(sic)
. Nurse Gilchrist has told the police that Miss Slater was one of her patients. She last visited her on 14th
April, over two weeks before her death.
The time of Shipman's first visit to Miss Slater's home is of some importance. If he visited her before she spoke to Mrs Brelsford, the inference must be that Miss Slater was still alive when Shipman left. If, on the other hand, Shipman visited after the 1.10pm telephone call from Mrs Brelsford, he was the last person to see or to speak to Miss Slater before she was found dead at about 3.30pm.
On the visit request form, to which I have already referred, Shipman has written:
'Died about
3.30
found
(
by
)
neighbour
Mary McGowan
(
?
)
last seen
1.45
'
.
The times noted on the visit request form are different from those stated on Form B of the cremation certificate, where Shipman said that he had last seen Miss Slater alive at about 1pm, which if accurate would be before the telephone call from Mrs Brelsford. The neighbour, Mary McGowan, has not been traced and it is not known if she ever existed.
There is no entry in the handwritten record cards relating to the death. Two entries were recorded on the surgery computer for 2nd
May. The first says:
'Terminal care
not at all well try for eph
(
elderly persons' home
)
today'
.
The second entry says:
'[D] Found dead
1530 neighbour spoke to her 1500 brother contacted'
.
This entry is somewhat cryptic but I infer that it is intended to suggest that at 3.30pm Shipman attended and found Miss Slater dead. He recorded that a neighbour had spoken to her at 3pm, at which time he is suggesting she must have been alive. He records that he contacted Miss Slater's brother. Mrs Taylor is the only neighbour who has been in contact with the police. She certainly did not speak to Miss Slater at 3pm. Efforts to trace a neighbour who might have spoken to Miss Slater at 3pm have been unsuccessful.
The first entry was created at 4.47pm on 2nd
May, and the second entry was created one minute later at 4.48pm.
Shipman's Movements
The surgery appointments sheets and visits book show that Shipman saw a large number of patients on 2nd
May 1997. His wife, Mrs Primrose Shipman, was on duty at reception that day. Ten patients were booked into the morning surgery between 8.45am and about 10.15am. Nine attended. Shipman then saw nine more patients in the open surgery, scheduled to run between 10.15am and 11am. According to the Market Street Surgery staff, open surgery often ran over, to towards midday. Shipman would do administrative work after surgery and before he went out on his visits. The medical representatives' diary and appointments sheet show that Sally Bloom, of Allen & Hanburys, was due to meet Shipman on 2nd
May. The time of the appointment is not clear, although it appears on the appointments sheets between the end of open surgery and the beginning of the minor operations clinic at 2pm. Shipman appears to have performed two minor operations: the first at 2pm and the second at 2.30pm. Such minor operations were scheduled half an hour apart and were clearly more time consuming than the average appointment. Ten patients were booked into the afternoon surgery, scheduled to begin at 4pm.
Taking into account Shipman's other commitments on 2nd
May, it is possible that Shipman first visited Miss Slater shortly before he was due back at the surgery for the minor operations clinic. The note on the visit request form that he visited at 1.45pm might well be right. I think it is unlikely that he could have visited her as early as 1pm but I cannot say that it would have been impossible.
The later visit, at which the body was discovered, can be timed with confidence. A telephone call lasting less than two minutes was made from Miss Slater's home to Shipman's surgery at 3.30pm. Ten minutes later, Shipman telephoned Mr Slater from Miss Slater's house to inform him of the death. It appears that Shipman returned to Miss Slater's house shortly before 3.30pm and telephoned the surgery, possibly to inform the staff that he might be late for surgery. It seems likely that it was then that someone wrote in the visits book the word
'Dead'
.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker has considered Miss Slater's medical records and the cremation certificate. In his opinion, both sources of information give rise to a moderate degree of suspicion.
Dr Grenville says that he would have expected the final course of Miss Slater to have been more prolonged than Shipman suggests.
Other Matters
Miss Slater had a repeat prescription for 30mg morphine sulphate and also 10mg temazepam tablets. Morphine sulphate was last prescribed on 17th
April 1997 when 56 tablets were provided. DC O'Brien provided a statement confirming that 39 of those tablets were recovered from Shipman's home. Mr Slater says that Shipman might have given Miss Slater morphine injections as part of her treatment, although he cannot be sure. There is no record of a prescription for ampoules of morphine or diamorphine for injection in Miss Slater's home.
According to Mr Slater, his sister made a will and left the proceeds of her estate to St Ann's Hospice. Shortly before Miss Slater died, she had said to her brother that she had become disheartened with the hospice and wished to change her will in favour of the Christie Hospital and Shipman. She did not change her will before she died. Mr Slater says that he told Shipman of Miss Slater's intention. Shipman replied that he did not think she had anything to leave. However, he then asked if he could have her sewing machine for his wife. Mr Slater agreed and Shipman collected it soon afterwards.
Conclusion
At the time of her death, Miss Slater was extremely unwell. She had been suffering from cancer for many months but, a month before her death, she had refused further chemotherapy treatment. The cancer had spread and Miss Slater clearly knew that she would not live for much longer. It is theoretically possible that Miss Slater died a natural death on 2nd
May.
Set against the background of her recent activities, however, Miss Slater's death was very sudden. She had been shopping on 30th
April and had voted on 1st
May. She had been coping in her own home and the district nurse was not visiting frequently. It does not appear to me that Miss Slater had reached the terminal stage of her illness. For that reason, the suddenness of her death, and its temporal association with a visit from Shipman, gives rise to deep suspicion that the death was not natural.
The question arises as to whether Shipman killed Miss Slater during his first visit to the house. I cannot say with certainty that no one spoke to or saw Miss Slater alive after Shipman's first visit. It is possible, but unlikely, that Miss Slater spoke to Mrs Brelsford after that visit. It is also possible that Miss Slater was seen by a neighbour at about 3pm, although there is no confirmation that such a person existed. However, if Shipman's own note of the time of his visit on the visit request form is accurate and he saw Miss Slater at 1.45pm, he might well have been the last person to communicate with her. Only the mysterious neighbour might have seen her, but she might have been an invention of Shipman's. These considerations raise the index of suspicion that Shipman might have killed Miss Slater at his first visit.
That Shipman should make a second visit in order to give himself an opportunity to 'discover' the body would be entirely typical of his conduct in other cases where he has killed a patient. The accounts that Shipman gave to Mrs Taylor and Mr Slater as to the reason for his first visit, his departure and his second visit were inconsistent with each other. That may prove nothing, as one or both of the witnesses might be mistaken in their recollection. However, it seems to me that Shipman's stories are essentially implausible. If Miss Slater was in need of terminal care or even temporary care, there is no sensible reason why Shipman could not have picked up the telephone there and then to see how it could be arranged. We cannot be certain whether Shipman actually made enquiries with either St Ann's Hospice or The Sycamores. However, he certainly did not report the outcome of his enquiries to Mrs Taylor or Mr Slater. In my judgement, it is highly likely that the accounts were fabricated.
The computerised medical records created at 4.47pm and 4.48pm, after the discovery of the body, are misleading and give rise to suspicion. If the first entry were genuine, one would have expected Shipman to record his conversation with Miss Slater on his return to the surgery. If he had made any arrangements for admission to an institution, one would expect them to be recorded. However, he made no entry at all until after the death had been 'discovered'. Then he made two entries which gave the impression that they had been made on separate occasions but which had in fact been made at one sitting. He gave the impression that the first had been made while Miss Slater was still alive. In fact she was already dead.
Shipman's reference to a neighbour in the second computerised entry gives rise to suspicion. He suggests that a neighbour spoke to Miss Slater at 3pm, which would be well after Shipman's first visit. This neighbour is not identified. On the visit request form, Shipman says that a Mary McGowan found Miss Slater dead. Efforts to trace her have failed. The evidence suggests that it was Shipman himself who 'found' Miss Slater's body. If a Mary McGowan had been involved, one might have expected Mrs Taylor or Mr Slater to be aware of her. They are not. In my view, these entries are a deliberate attempt by Shipman to create the impression that he was not the last person to see or speak to Miss Slater before her death, when in fact he knew that he was. He has also tried to give the impression that it was not he who found the body. I have found that, in other cases, Shipman has made such false entries, usually on Form B but occasionally in medical records.
This is a difficult case in that it is clear that Miss Slater had not long to live and it is theoretically possible that she died a natural death. However, the case has many of the hallmarks of a Shipman killing and I am sure that Shipman killed Miss Slater by administering an injection of strong opiate, probably diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001