The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Joseph Shaw
Introduction
Mr Joseph Shaw died at his home, 14 Talbot Road, Newton, Hyde on Friday, 3rd
March 1995 at the age of 88. He was a widower and had lived alone since the death of his wife. He had been a patient of Shipman for many years and had followed Shipman when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was bronchopneumonia.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions, Mr Shaw's niece, Mrs Christine Mary Hirst, contacted the police to express her concern about the circumstances of his death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Hirst and Mr Shaw's home helps, Mrs Evelyn Barbara Schofield and Mrs Irene Marie White.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Shaw, but an inquest into his death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Hirst and has had access to Mr Shaw's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and to other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Shaw was quite a frail elderly man. From about 1991, he suffered from motor neurone disease, which caused unsteadiness on his feet and difficulty in swallowing. He was unable to go out alone. His only regular medication was digoxin, which had been prescribed since November 1993 for an irregular heartbeat. Mr Shaw managed to live on his own with the assistance of two home helps, who visited each day, one in the morning and one in the afternoon. His lunch was brought by the meals on wheels service. Despite his problems he remained mentally alert. Mrs Hirst visited him twice or three times a week.
According to the medical records, Mr Shaw had suffered three attacks of bronchitis in the year or so before his death. In January 1994, he had a chest infection, described first as bronchitis and then as bronchopneumonia. He was treated with an antibiotic and recovered. In October 1994, he was said to have acute wheezy bronchitis but the episode appears to have been short. In January 1995, he was given an antibiotic for acute bronchitis.
Mr Shaw fell in his kitchen on Saturday, 11th
February 1995. He was seen at Tameside General Hospital two days later, when he was found to have fractures of two ribs. There was pain in the chest on movement but no pneumothorax. The discharge report records that Mr Shaw was given paracetamol and Amoxil (amoxicillin, an antibiotic). He was advised to see his general practitioner three days later. He was warned that he was at risk of developing a chest infection and was advised to perform breathing exercises to keep his lungs clear. Mr Shaw followed the instruction to see his doctor and telephoned Shipman's surgery on 16th
February. A note in the visits book recorded that he had two broken ribs and that he would like the doctor to check his chest, as he could soon get a chest infection. The computerised notes show that Shipman visited that day, had a chat with the patient and advised him to continue taking paracetamol. Presumably there was no sign of a chest infection at that stage. Mrs Hirst thinks that her uncle made a good recovery from this accident and was soon his usual self. She said that he was meticulous about doing the breathing exercises. When she visited him, he would show her what he had to do. Mrs White formed the impression that Mr Shaw was weary, although not ill, in the weeks before he died.
Mrs Hirst last saw her uncle after work on Wednesday, 1st
March. She stayed for about an hour. He showed her his exercises. He seemed to have no problem with his breathing. She was not concerned about him.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Schofield visited Mr Shaw each morning and lunchtime. On the morning of Friday, 3rd
March, Mr Shaw told her that he was expecting a visit from Shipman. She cannot recall whether Mr Shaw had called for him or why he was coming. Mr Shaw's name does not appear in the visits book for that day. When Mrs Schofield returned at lunchtime, Shipman had still not visited. She left at about 12.30pm. Mr Shaw did not seem to her to be seriously ill. If she had thought he was, she would have called an ambulance.
At about 5.30pm that afternoon, Mrs White called at Mr Shaw's home. Through the window she could see him sitting in a chair in the front living room. She knocked on the window but he did not respond. At first, she thought he was asleep but then she realised something was wrong. She called for an ambulance. When it arrived, the paramedics forced entry into the house. Mr Shaw was sitting in a chair by the fire, dressed in his normal day clothes. He looked very peaceful. He was dead. Mrs Hirst was summoned and arrived about ten minutes later. When she first saw her uncle she thought he had fallen asleep in his chair.
Shipman was contacted and attended within an hour. When he arrived, he told Mrs Hirst that he had seen Mr Shaw, either on the day of death or the day before, she cannot recall which. He said that, when he visited, he found Mr Shaw was suffering from pneumonia. This came as a great surprise to Mrs Hirst because her uncle had seemed well on the Wednesday afternoon. She wondered why, if her uncle had pneumonia, he had not been admitted to hospital. She did not express these thoughts out loud. Shipman also told her that her uncle had had motor neurone disease. This also came as a surprise to her, although she realised that it probably accounted for his unsteadiness and his difficulty in swallowing. Shipman did not demur when she said that she assumed no post-mortem examination would be needed owing to Shipman's recent visit. Mrs White, who was still present when Shipman arrived, recalls that Shipman consoled Mrs Hirst by suggesting that her uncle's death had been 'a nice way to go'.
The computerised medical records contain four entries dated 3rd
March. The first reads:
'Influenza with bronchopneumonia noisy chest wishes to stay hom
(
e
)
'
. The second records that
'amox'
medication had been requested. This presumably relates to the amoxicillin, which Mr Shaw had been prescribed at hospital. The manner in which the record is made would suggest that Mr Shaw requested the prescription and does not appear to record Shipman having prescribed the drug. There is no entry relating to Mr Shaw in the acute prescriptions book for 3rd
March. The third entry records that Mr Shaw was seen in his own home by Shipman. The final entry reads:
'[D] Found dead amb present'
.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), giving bronchopneumonia as the immediate cause. He recorded the approximate interval between onset and death as 12-24 hours. He stated that motor neurone disease had contributed to the death but was unrelated to the bronchopneumonia. He said that he had last seen Mr Shaw alive on the day of his death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate, where he recorded the time of death as
'1600hrs'
. It is not clear how he is supposed to have known the time of death. As he stated on Form B, no one was present at the death. He said that he had attended Mr Shaw for four to five days during his last illness. This appears to be a lie, as there is no evidence that Shipman had seen or spoken to Mr Shaw during the two weeks before 3rd
March. This entry is also inconsistent with the statement made on the MCCD, that the approximate interval between the onset of bronchopneumonia and death was 12-24 hours.
On Form B, Shipman said that he had last seen Mr Shaw alive
'About 4 hours'
before death. This suggests a visit at about noon. This is inconsistent with Mrs Schofield's evidence that she was with Mr Shaw until 12.30pm and that Shipman had not attended at that stage. We know from the appointments sheet that on the day of Mr Shaw's death, Shipman saw 11 patients in the pre-booked morning surgery, followed by six patients in the open surgery scheduled to run from 10.15-11am. He would then write prescriptions and deal with administrative matters, unless he had an urgent visit. It is unlikely that Shipman would have left the surgery before noon. The appointments sheet also shows that he had two minor operations scheduled at 2pm and 2.30pm respectively. It appears that Shipman had two periods in which to carry out his visits that day. The first would be from about noon until 2pm and the second from about 3pm until 4pm.
On Form B, Shipman said that he knew from his own observations that the mode of death was coma of hours' duration. How he was supposed to know this is hard to imagine.
The Expert Evidence
Following his consideration of Mr Shaw's medical records, Professor Richard Baker considered the death to be highly suspicious. He considered the cremation certificate separately and concluded that the contents gave rise to a moderate degree of suspicion.
Dr John Grenville has described bronchopneumonia and lobar pneumonia in his generic report. He notes that a patient with pneumonia may become ill quite rapidly over a period of a few hours. The patient should be treated with antibiotics and, in a severe case, should be admitted to hospital for intravenous administration. Bronchopneumonia is most likely to occur in a debilitated immobile patient who does not have the strength to cough. Secretions build up in the lungs, which easily become infected. The doctor hears noisy 'rattly' breathing. Shipman claimed that Mr Shaw had a
'noisy chest'
on 3rd
March and recorded this in the computerised notes. The outlook in a debilitated patient is often poor. As to the speed at which bronchopneumonia might develop, Doctor Grenville notes:
'Patients dying of bronchopneumonia are often expected to die anyway. Death may occur within hours of the onset of the bronchopneumonia or a patient who is terminally ill may live for several days with bronchopneumonia. Indeed, the bronchopneumonia occasionally abates but often recurs before death.
'Patients dying of bronchopneumonia are usually weak and become exhausted. They usually lapse into unconsciousness and the respiration becomes increasingly rattly. Eventually the respiratory effort decreases and the breaths become shallower until they cease altogether...
'...It follows from the description of bronchopneumonia and lobar pneumonia that it is inconsistent for a patient dying from these conditions to be found sitting in a chair looking peaceful and appearing to be asleep'
.
Conclusion
There are a number of highly suspicious factors surrounding this death.
The first and most obvious is that Mr Shaw's death was discovered very shortly after a visit by Shipman. No one saw him alive or spoke to him after Shipman's visit on 3rd
March. This in itself is a highly suspicious factor.
Mr Shaw's general health was not good towards the end of his life. His mobility was restricted and he had a tendency to fall. He suffered occasional chest infections and I think it likely that his motor neurone disease made his cough reflexes weak. The fall three weeks before his death gave rise to an increased risk of a chest infection, which might develop into pneumonia. Having said that, the evidence does not support the suggestion that Mr Shaw developed a chest infection during a period of four to five days before the death. Mrs Hirst noted nothing wrong with his breathing on the evening of 1st
March. Nor is there any independent evidence that Mr Shaw had a severe chest infection as late as 12.30pm on the day of the death.
The circumstances in which Shipman came to visit Mr Shaw on 3rd
March are not clear. It is possible that Mr Shaw telephoned the surgery to request a visit, although if he did I would have expected to find an entry in the visits book. If he did so, it must have been because he was feeling unwell or had some concern about his health. It is possible he asked for a prescription of amoxicillin, which he had had before for chest infections. It is possible the staff suggested that the doctor would visit. Had he given the impression to the staff that he was seriously ill, they would, following usual practice, have advised him to call an ambulance or called one from the surgery. It is also possible that Shipman visited of his own volition, making a routine call on an elderly patient who had had a fall three weeks earlier. The fact that Mr Shaw was expecting Shipman leads me to conclude that it was more likely than not that Mr Shaw had requested a visit that day. I think it likely that he was feeling under the weather, possibly with the beginnings of a chest infection. However, I am satisfied that at 12.30pm he was not showing obvious signs of illness.
Shipman's record of the visit on 3rd
March raises some suspicion. It is very similar to many I have seen in cases in which I am sure Shipman has killed. Shipman presents a picture of a condition that requires hospital treatment but says that the patient was unwilling to go. I accept of course that elderly people are sometimes reluctant to go into hospital. In this case, Shipman does not appear to have made any real attempt at persuasion and there is no suggestion in the note that a relative should be contacted. As Dr Grenville has explained, no conscientious doctor would leave a sick and elderly patient alone, without even making any arrangements for the urgent delivery of medication.
The death and cremation certificates give rise to grave suspicion. On the MCCD, a document that might be seen by the relatives, Shipman recorded the interval between the onset of bronchopneumonia and death as 12-24 hours. On Form B, a document that would not be seen by the relatives but would be subjected to scrutiny by other doctors, he said he had attended Mr Shaw during his last illness for four to five days. Not only is that latter entry a lie, but it is a lie with a purpose. On Form B, Shipman is presenting a more plausible progression of a case of bronchopneumonia, less likely to arouse the suspicion of a confirming doctor and the medical referee than the very short period suggested on the MCCD.
Shipman claimed to know that the death occurred at 4pm. He could not have known this with any precision. He suggested that he had visited at about noon. That is possible. I cannot be sure of the accuracy of Mrs Schofield's recollection of the time she left Mr Shaw's, although I accept that she is probably right because she was following her usual routine. What does strike me as sinister is the positive statement of the time of death, which seeks to put a period of four hours between Shipman's visit and Mr Shaw's death. I think the statement of the time of death is a deliberate attempt by Shipman to distance himself from the death.
Although bronchopneumonia can develop quite suddenly and proceed rapidly to death in a debilitated patient, it does not appear to me that Mr Shaw was a candidate for so rapid a death. He was not debilitated. He was up and dressed on the day of his death. Shipman claimed that Mr Shaw was in a coma for
'hours'
before death. How he was supposed to know this is not clear. He claims to know it of his own knowledge. If he did, he must have seen him in a coma at the time of his visit. But Shipman suggests in the medical records that Mr Shaw was awake and talking. In any event, it would be unthinkable for a doctor to leave a patient alone in a house if he were lying in a coma. So, the statement that Mr Shaw was in a coma for
'hours'
is a lie. In my view, it is a lie designed to create a plausible picture of a man dying of bronchopneumonia.
The position in which Mr Shaw was found, sitting peacefully in a chair, was inconsistent with a death from bronchopneumonia but entirely typical of the appearance of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by the administration of a diamorphine injection.
Taking these factors into account, I have come to the conclusion that Shipman killed Mr Shaw. Although Mr Shaw was at risk of death from some form of pneumonia, he died so quickly after Shipman's visit that I am driven to the conclusion that this cannot have been a natural death. I am satisfied so as to be sure of this.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001