The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Jack Leslie Shelmerdine
Introduction
Mr Jack Leslie Shelmerdine died at Tameside General Hospital on Wednesday, 28th
November 1979 at the age of 77. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and he thought highly of him. The cause of his death was certified by Dr P Kumar at Tameside General Hospital to be bronchopneumonia.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions for murder, Mr Shelmerdine's son, Mr Jack Shelmerdine, hereafter referred to as Mr Shelmerdine junior, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of the death. The police carried out a limited investigation into the death. No witness statements were taken.
An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has received statements and correspondence from Mr Shelmerdine junior and his wife, Mrs Sheila Margaret Shelmerdine. The Inquiry has also had access to a complaint made to the North Western Regional Health Authority by Mr Shelmerdine junior in November 1979, as well as Shipman's response. The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1979. Mr Shelmerdine's medical records have not survived. The Inquiry has obtained reports from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Shelmerdine junior has provided an account of his father's medical history. Mr Shelmerdine had chronic bronchitis for many years. In 1974, when returning from a short holiday in Wales, he became very ill. The journey was halted and an ambulance took him to a specialist heart unit in Chester where he remained for three weeks. He was diagnosed as suffering from 'heart problems', although the precise diagnosis is unknown. It was made clear by the doctors that he was not to undertake any strenuous activities.
Following that episode, Mr Shelmerdine and his wife, Mrs Eleanor Shelmerdine, moved to live with their son and his wife at their home in Dukinfield. Mr Shelmerdine had been a shopkeeper but the day-to-day management of the shop was taken over by his daughter-in-law and Mr Shelmerdine's role was confined to book-keeping. Mr Shelmerdine was registered with Dr John Bennett but transferred to Shipman when he arrived in Hyde in 1977. It appears that Shipman prescribed some form of medication for Mr Shelmerdine's bronchitis and cardiac difficulties, although it is unclear what this medication was. While he was on holiday in Blackpool in August 1979, Mr Shelmerdine's health deteriorated and he consulted a doctor who said that he was suffering from left ventricular failure.
Between August and November 1979, Mr Shelmerdine did not suffer from shortness of breath but his son remembers that from early November 1979, he experienced 'even greater difficulty than normal with his breathing'.
The Events Leading up to Death
In his first statement to the Inquiry, Mr Shelmerdine junior said that, on or around Friday, 23rd
November 1979, Shipman provided some tablets for his father, which Mr Shelmerdine junior collected for him. Correspondence from Shipman suggests that this happened on the previous Wednesday and that the tablets were an antibiotic. Prednisolone was also prescribed. Over the weekend, Mr Shelmerdine stayed in bed and did not get up at all. He was having difficulty with his breathing, which was heavy, although not noisy or 'rattling'. He was lucid and was eating and drinking small amounts. Mr Shelmerdine junior did not think it necessary to call out the doctor.
According to Shipman's visits book he was on duty on Monday, 26th
November. This probably relates to his being on duty pursuant to the Donneybrook doctors' rota, covering visits required outside normal surgery hours.
Between about 9pm and 10pm on the Monday evening, Mrs Shelmerdine noticed that her husband had severe breathing difficulties. She telephoned for Shipman and Mrs Sheila Shelmerdine telephoned her husband, who was attending a meeting at the Masonic hall.
Mr Shelmerdine junior arrived at the house and formed the view that his father's breathlessness was being aggravated by feelings of panic. Shipman arrived shortly afterwards. Shipman went straight upstairs to see Mr Shelmerdine and gave him an injection. Mrs Shelmerdine was present in the room. Mrs Sheila Shelmerdine remembers Shipman saying that he had given her father-in-law an injection to help him rest and her mother-in-law confirmed that he had done so. She understood that the injection had been given to help Mr Shelmerdine to 'get through the evening'.
Mr Shelmerdine junior is unable to say with certainty whether he was in the room at the time that the injection was given, although he thinks that he could have been because he remembers that Shipman gave an injection into his father's left arm. Shipman went downstairs and, out of Mrs Shelmerdine's earshot, said to Mr Shelmerdine junior that his father was 'very, very ill'. He said that he had given an injection that would 'help him rest'. About five minutes later, Mr Shelmerdine junior went upstairs and found his father unconscious, apparently asleep.
In his first statement to the Inquiry, Mr Shelmerdine junior did not say that there was any discussion about hospital treatment for his father. However, now that he has refreshed his memory from a letter written at the time, it is clear to him that there was such a discussion, probably on the Monday morning, when it appears Shipman might have also visited. It appears that Shipman told Mr Shelmerdine junior that his father might not survive a transfer to hospital and promised to arrange for a domiciliary visit by a consultant at 2pm the following day. In the evening, there was probably a reference to the arrangement made earlier that day, that a consultant would visit on Tuesday.
Mrs Sheila Shelmerdine says that Mr Shelmerdine did not regain consciousness after the injection on the Monday evening. During the following day his condition seemed to have improved, in that his breathing was easier.
On the morning of Tuesday, 27th
November, Mr Shelmerdine junior checked on his father before going to work and found that he still appeared to be asleep. When he returned home at about 5pm and found his father still asleep, he became concerned. There had been no domiciliary visit from a consultant. He telephoned the Donneybrook Surgery. He knew from his mother and wife that his father had not stirred. He was put through to Shipman who apparently said, 'Oh, he might make it, I will send for an ambulance to take him to Tameside General Hospital'. An ambulance arrived a short time later and Mr Shelmerdine was taken to Tameside General Hospital. Mr Shelmerdine junior and his mother also went to the hospital to check that Mr Shelmerdine was settled. He then returned home to collect nightclothes for himself and his mother, with the intention of staying the night at the hospital.
Mr Shelmerdine junior and his mother were sleeping at the hospital when, at some time between 2am and 3am, they were told that Mr Shelmerdine's condition had deteriorated. They were with him for half an hour before he died.
In his first statement to the Inquiry, Mr Shelmerdine junior said that after his father's death, he had thought that it was very strange that his father had been asleep for such a long time. He said that 'the thought of euthanasia more than crossed my mind'. He said that he wanted to ask questions but did not know how to initiate an inquiry. He said that he thought that the investigating doctors would not take a complaint seriously and would close ranks. He said that he was also concerned about the stress that it might cause his mother. This reasoning is confounded by the fact that on 30th
November 1979, Mr Shelmerdine junior, who is a magistrate, wrote a detailed letter of complaint and a request for an investigation to the North West Regional Health Authority. His concern did not relate to Shipman's role in his father's death but to the delay in securing a home visit from a geriatrician on 27th
November.
The Inquiry now has a copy of this handwritten letter, which is dated 30th
November 1979. Mr Shelmerdine junior has confirmed that it is completely accurate. It is reproduced below:
'North Western Regional Health Authority
Gateway House
Piccadilly South
Manchester 1
30th
November 1979
Dear Sir,
On Wednesday 21st
November my father, Jack Leslie Shelmerdine, who was a chronic bronchitic with a history of heart trouble, became ill. We had a visit from our GP, Dr Shipman, who prescribed treatment. In the early hours of Friday 23rd
November we became concerned over his breathing and called the emergency doctor. He gave treatment and left a letter for the G.P., which I left at the surgery later that morning.
On Monday 26th
November we again called in Dr Shipman who said that he would get a specialist to see my father on Tuesday. On Monday evening we called Dr Shipman who diagnosed the situation as critical. On Tuesday morning Dr Shipman called again and said that there was a substantial improvement and that he thought that there was a good chance of recovery, but would await the specialist visit (expected at 2.00pm) before prescribing further treatment.
At 4.20pm the specialist had not arrived and I phoned Dr Shipman at his surgery. He advised waiting until 5.00pm because he had been assured that the specialist would come. At 5.20pm we again rang the surgery because no specialist had arrived. Dr Shipman checked and telephoned back to say that he had been told that the specialist had not checked in to his office but that he should be on his way. Dr Shipman had made them aware of the urgency. Dr Shipman asked us to contact him again at 7.00pm. This we did, and, because of the absence of consultant, Dr Shipman arranged my father's admission to Tameside General Hospital.
On admission I insisted that the consultant be contacted by the Senior Houseman who took charge of my father's case. I was assured that this had been done and that a consultant was in agreement with the treatment being given. I assumed that this consultant was the same person as the one who should have visited our home. I'm sure that every attention was given to my father, but he died at 3.00am on Wednesday 28th
November.
At 5.00pm on Wednesday, whilst the house was being attended to by a relative, a specialist called to attend to my father. He would not give his name to the relative. On Thursday morning I telephoned Dr Shipman in order to establish the name of the anonymous consultant. Unfortunately, Dr Shipman had gone on holiday.
Several questions arise. Why did the specialist not visit at, or about, the time stated? Why did the specialist not contact Dr Shipman, if there was an unavoidable delay? Who was contacted by the Houseman? Why did the hospital not inform the specialist of my father's admission and death?
AND
Did the 6-8 hour delay contribute to my father's failure to recover?
There are sufficient questions for a very serious inquiry.
Yours faithfully
J Shelmerdine'
.
Although that letter was a complaint against the hospital addressed to the Regional Health Authority, it would appear that it also came to the attention of the local Family Practitioners Committee (FPC), which sought Shipman's comments. The Inquiry has obtained the original typewritten letter of response from Shipman, which reads as follows:
'CONFIDENTIAL
Your Ref: PLB/MMD
14th
December 1979
Mr Bates
Administrator
Family Practitioner Committee
44-46 Market Street
Hyde
Cheshire.
Dear Mr Bates,
Complainant: Mr. J. Shelmerdine. Re: Father
Mr. Jack Leslie Shelmerdine (deceased)
Thank you for your letter regarding the complaint re Jack Leslie Shelmerdine.
I would confirm basically what Mr. Shelmerdine is saying is correct. I will give a resume of my actions.
Mr. Jack Shelmerdine has been known to me for the past two years. He was basically a man who had severe, chronic asthmatic bronchitis with ischaemic heart disease. He was on a minimal amount of treatment which would keep him in balance, and with this kind of history he was always on a tight-rope where he could easily die of severe chest infection, which most people would have recovered from. I saw him on Wednesday 21st
November, at the request of the family at home and decided he had an exacerbation of his bronchitis, and prescribed the usual antibiotics, and also started him on some Prednisolone, which is a drug to reduce the amount of spasm in his lungs. On Friday 23rd
November I received a letter from the Duty Doctor, informing me that he had visited because of his breathlessness. Since I had already seen him, I arranged a further visit and decided that things were going along fairly satisfactorily. On Monday, 26th
November, I arrived to find Mr Shelmerdine extremely ill, and I decided, after talking to the family, that his prognosis was not very good, and we would arrange for a Geriatrician to visit him at home the following day. I requested
(
sic
)
to re-visit on the Monday evening, and when I arrived there I found that Mr Shelmerdine was having attacks of acute left ventricular failure superimposed on his chronic illness. Prognosis, of course, for this kind of condition is extremely poor. I discussed the situation with the family, we decided we would leave him at home, and I subsequently gave him 10mg Morphine intra-muscally
(
sic
)
. On review the following morning, that is Tuesday 27th
, I called again to find that Mr Shelmerdine was considerably better. His respiratory rates returned to thirty/minute, which although excessive, for a normal person, were not very far off normal range for him
(
the words 'for him' are handwritten
)
. His heart rate had returned to one hundred and twenty, which again was compatible with his condition. I thought that possibly Mr. Shelmerdine would then make a recovery.
Continued......
On Monday, 26th
November, one of my receptionist
(
sic
)
rang through to the Geriatricians at Ashton and requested a Domiciliary visit from the Geriatrician. The Geriatrician was Dr. Matine
(
sic
)
.
On Tuesday 27th
November, after seeing Mr. Shelmerdine at home, on my return to Surgery, I checked that a Geriatrician was going to visit and this was confirmed by the Geriatric Department. At about half past four on the 27th
, I received a telephone call from Mr. Shelmerdine JUN
(
the abbreviation 'JUN' is handwritten in pen
)
enquiring as to why the Consultant had not visited. I informed him that this would not be an excessively late time, and that he was to let me know if the Consultant had not arrived by about half-past five. Mr Shelmerdine duly rang me, and I, at that stage, rang the Hospital, spoke with the Duty Doctor on call, whose name was not unfortunately given. The Doctor informed me that the Consultant had not returned to the Hospital and that it was possible he was still doing visits. I was therefore to allow seven o'clock to arrive and, if the Consultant had not arrived, at the Shelmerdine's, I was to contact the Hospital again. I subsequently informed Mr Shelmerdine of this information, and after Surgery I returned home. At seven o'clock, Mr Shelmerdine rang me at home and informed me that nobody had arrived. I rang Ashton General and spoke to the Duty Doctor on call, who was the same doctor I had spoken to previously. He then agreed to take Mr Shelmerdine and I arranged an ambulance; and subsequently rang Mr Shelmerdine to inform him that an ambulance would be arriving within twenty minutes. The ambulance service rang me back to let me know that Mr Shelmerdine had been picked-up and was on his way into the Hospital. On the Thursday, I was on holiday, therefore could not be contacted regarding the name of the Consultant who arrived on the Wednesday.
This sequence of events is not unusual and it is not unusual for the Geriatric Service to arrive several days later than requested. However, in this particular case, I impressed upon the Geriatric Department personally, and not through the Receptionists, that this was an urgent visit; and that Mr. Shelmerdine would be requiring admission to Hospital. If the Consultant considered that he had a possible chance of living, if not he would be cared for at home. The fact that the Consultant did not arrive on the day requested, necessitated my getting him into Hospital to give him what chance possible there was to survive.
If I may be allowed to comment on the last paragraph of Mr Shelmerdine's letter, which you kindly sent me a copy of, regarding the first points he raises, I am unable to give any information. May I just add that the final point he raises regarding the delay in his father's admission to Hospital, I personally do not
(
the word 'not' is underlined in pen
)
think this affected the ultimate outcome, as in my opinion, Mr Shelmerdine was dying. However there was considerable pressure from the family to obtain a Specialists opinion regarding Mr. Shelmerdine, and no doubt, even if he had been admitted on Monday evening, he would still have died within a few days.
I trust this resume of events clarifies my role in the events. I will be quite happy to help further if this is required.
Yours sincerely,
Dr. H.F. Shipman'.
The most important factual issues arising out of this correspondence surround the giving of an injection and Mr Shelmerdine's condition after the visit that took place on the Monday evening. His son's letter was silent on both subjects, which may not be surprising given that his main concern was over the delay in admission to hospital. Shipman confirmed that he gave an injection. Shipman said, however, that Mr Shelmerdine was
'considerably better'
on the Tuesday when he saw him. It would be surprising if even Shipman was prepared to make so bold an assertion in correspondence when he knew that the family might be asked to comment on it. This assessment would not necessarily exclude the possibility that Mr Shelmerdine was still unconscious or sleeping on the Tuesday. Even his family recognises that in terms of his breathing at least, he had improved.
Despite the fact that Shipman clearly did visit Mr Shelmerdine on a number of occasions in late November 1979, his name does not appear in Shipman's visits book at all that month. Mrs Sheila Shelmerdine says that these visits were not unannounced. She says that she knows that her father-in-law was not taking diamorphine, morphine or pethidine.
Certification
Mr Shelmerdine junior recalls that a junior doctor at the hospital told him that because his father was admitted to hospital only a few hours before his death, the case would have to be referred to the coroner. This would be correct. Mr Shelmerdine junior learned shortly afterwards, however, that the coroner had decided that no post-mortem examination or other inquiry was needed. The coroner's office has been contacted by the Inquiry and there are no records relating to Mr Shelmerdine's death.
Dr Kumar certified that the cause of death was bronchopneumonia. He also certified that myocardial infarction with atrial fibrillation had contributed to the death but was not related to its primary cause. There was no post-mortem examination. For Dr Kumar to have been in a position to ascertain that there was a history of myocardial infarction with atrial fibrillation might suggest that he had contacted Shipman and obtained this history from him. Alternatively, he might have consulted the previous hospital records. In his letter to the FPC, Shipman mentioned ischaemic heart disease but did not mention atrial fibrillation. The death was registered on 29th
November 1979.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville has provided three reports to the Inquiry concerning Mr Shelmerdine's death. The death was first considered in the report on eight cases where the delayed effects of morphine or diamorphine were considered. In that report Dr Grenville said:
'I do not think it is possible that the injection given to Mr Shelmerdine by Shipman was the direct cause of his death. It is possible that the injection given by Shipman was of a therapeutic dose of Diamorphine but that Mr Shelmerdine was unusually sensitive to opiates and became profoundly sedated. Under such circumstances the onset of bronchopneumonia which was apparently found at post mortem, would not be unusual'
.
In fact, no post-mortem examination was carried out. In his second report, Dr Grenville said the following:
'I have previously dealt with the case of Jack Shelmerdine in my report regarding the possible delayed effects of morphine or diamorphine injections. There is insufficient evidence to show that the injection given by Shipman to Mr Shelmerdine was morphine or diamorphine. If the injection was of an opiate it is unlikely to have been the direct cause of Mr Shelmerdine's death. It is possible that the injection given to Mr Shelmerdine was of an antibiotic or a tranquilliser'
.
The reason why Dr Grenville is able to say with confidence that an injection of opiate did not directly cause the death is that where an overdose of opioid medication directly causes death, death following respiratory depression would be expected to occur within one hour.
Dr Grenville infers from the evidence that in addition to his bronchitis, Mr Shelmerdine also suffered from ischaemic heart disease with periodic left ventricular failure. He says that episodes of left ventricular failure might well have been associated with exacerbations of his chronic bronchitis.
Shipman wrote that he found Mr Shelmerdine extremely ill on the Monday evening, diagnosed acute left ventricular failure and gave 10mg morphine intramuscularly. Neither Shipman nor the family mentions that Mr Shelmerdine was in pain, although the family suggests that he was having breathing difficulties which may have been aggravated by a sense of panic. The inference must be that if Shipman intended to administer the morphine therapeutically, he did so because of the left ventricular failure. Dr Grenville says that intramuscular morphine is not the correct treatment for acute left ventricular failure. He says that where a patient is suffering from severe chronic bronchitis, the dangers in using morphine to treat left ventricular failure are very high and probably never outweigh the potential benefits. This judgement must, however, be made in the case of each individual patient. Dr Grenville says that it is difficult to estimate the dose of opiate which might be optimum for a patient in Mr Shelmerdine's condition, but he would expect it to be of the order of 3-5mg morphine, to be given intravenously and very slowly, titrating dose against response. With doses higher than this, Dr Grenville would expect the respiratory depressant effect to become significant. Titration is far harder to achieve when a drug is given by the intramuscular route rather than intravenously, as the effects are not quickly apparent. It is hard to imagine how Shipman could honestly and sensibly have thought 10mg morphine given intramuscularly was appropriate.
Dr Grenville also says that if an extremely large dose of morphine was administered intramuscularly, he would expect a delay of minutes before unconsciousness supervened. In a patient whose respiratory function was already compromised, this period might be significantly less.
Dr Grenville says that it would be expected that a patient would be sedated following an adequate, but not excessive, dose of an opiate and that a lapse into sleep, or unconsciousness would not, of itself, be an indication for further action. If the patient's respiration became obviously and significantly depressed after a dose of an opiate, then action would be required.
Conclusion
This case does not fit the pattern of what was later to become Shipman's habitual and preferred method of killing his victims. Over many years, Shipman administered substantial doses of morphine or diamorphine, which had the effect of suppressing respiration and causing death within about an hour at most.
However, the circumstances of this case do give rise to concern and suspicion that Shipman may have intentionally caused Mr Shelmerdine's death.
It is clear that in the late evening of Monday, 26th
November, Mr Shelmerdine was very poorly. He had chronic bronchitis and it appears that at this time he had particular difficulty in breathing. He may have been in panic and some distress. Shipman suggested, and this seems quite likely to be true, that Mr Shelmerdine was suffering from left ventricular failure. There is no doubt that Shipman gave an injection. As Shipman himself said that he gave morphine, there is every reason to believe that he had given morphine or diamorphine. It is apparent from the circumstances that Shipman must have brought the drug with him in his medical bag.
Because Shipman had been convicted of criminal offences in connection with controlled drugs in 1976, he had declared his intention not to keep a personal controlled drugs register. His possession of an opiate that evening did not accord with the regulations. I infer that it is likely that Shipman had obtained that drug illicitly, probably by prescribing more than was needed for one of his patients who was dying of cancer. Shipman had attended two such patients within recent months. By obtaining drugs in this way, Shipman would not be able to prescribe the drug of choice and would have used whatever he had available. On an occasion such as this, he might have had a morphine product or diamorphine. I have come across many cases in which Shipman has claimed to have given a modest dose of morphine for therapeutic reasons, but where I have concluded that he had in fact given a larger dose than he admitted. On some occasions, because I have been able to identify the source of supply, I have been able to say with confidence that he actually gave diamorphine when he claimed to give morphine.
It is clear from Dr Grenville's evidence that any doctor must know that to give an opiate to a patient with impaired respiratory function carries real risks. A modest dose of opiate may be justified for a patient who is in left ventricular failure, but if that is combined with chronic bronchitis, extreme caution is required. Yet Shipman gave a dose of morphine which was considerably larger than Dr Grenville says would be usual in such circumstances. It does not appear that he titrated the dose against Mr Shelmerdine's response. Had he done so, I would have expected it to be given intravenously and I would have expected that Shipman would have explained the process in his quite detailed letter in response to the complaint. In all the many sets of medical records I have examined, I have never found one in which Shipman claimed to have given a titrated dose.
It seems to me that what Shipman did was extremely dangerous for Mr Shelmerdine. Even if the dose was of 10mg morphine, that would have been large enough to make him sleep very deeply for several hours. Dr Grenville is very critical of Shipman's drug selection, of the dose he gave and of the route by which he gave it. With a history of chronic respiratory disease and recent chest infection, a sub-lethal dose of opioid medication would undoubtedly render the patient vulnerable to fatal bronchopneumonia by the indirect mechanism of suppressing the body's natural protective reflexes. In giving morphine, Shipman might have intended to achieve that end. If Shipman gave a larger dose of opiate than he later admitted, the risk to Mr Shelmerdine would have been even greater and it is quite possible that Shipman hoped and intended that Mr Shelmerdine would die that night as the direct result of the drug he had injected. Shipman had prepared the family for the worst by telling Mr Shelmerdine junior that his father was very, very ill.
I recognise that Shipman might have given an excessive dose of morphine in ignorance of the danger to which he was exposing him. That he was prepared to tell the Regional Health Authority that he had given Mr Shelmerdine 10mg morphine, would tend to suggest that he thought there was no harm in it. However, I do not think that can be the explanation for Shipman's actions. I say so for several reasons. First, Shipman had had a special interest in pethidine in the mid-1970s. By 1979, he had, I am satisfied, used strong opiates to kill several patients. I think he was very interested indeed in opiates and would have made it his business to be well informed on the subject. I think he well knew that opiates present a particular risk for patients with poor respiratory function. I think it is possible that he felt driven to admit that he had given morphine and in a not insubstantial dose, because by the time he wrote his letter of explanation, he might not have known whether or not there had been a post-mortem examination. If morphine were discovered, he would have to explain its presence. Second, Shipman gave this dose at home, late at night, and left Mr Shelmerdine in the care of his family. He would have known that Mr Shelmerdine would not have been closely monitored during the night and there would be little prospect of intervention if his respiration became severely depressed.
My conclusion is that it is likely that Shipman gave a dose of at least 10mg morphine, possibly more, with the intention and expectation that Mr Shelmerdine would die while unsupervised during the night of 26th
November. I think he would have known that even if the dose did not have that effect, it would increase the likelihood that he would die the following day. I think it likely that Shipman caused Mr Shelmerdine's death. However, I cannot say whether Mr Shelmerdine would have survived for much longer. It does appear that he was very seriously ill.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001