The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Harry Stafford
Introduction
Mr Harry Stafford died at his home, 51 Rock Street, Gee Cross, Hyde on Saturday, 17th
December 1988 at the age of 87. Mr Stafford had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Stafford's death was left ventricular failure due to coronary thrombosis.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's conviction, members of Mr Stafford's family expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of his death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Albert Edward Stafford (Mr Stafford's son, known as Ted), Mrs Doreen Agnes Stafford (Mr Stafford's daughter-in-law) and Mrs Brenda Mary McEvilly (Mr Stafford's neighbour).
An inquest into Mr Stafford's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mr Stafford and Mrs McEvilly and has had access to the cremation forms, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, the general practitioner records, Shipman's visits book for 1988, and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Stafford was a widower and lived alone. According to his son and daughter-in-law, Mr Stafford enjoyed good health, never had a major illness and was never admitted to hospital. He led a relatively active and independent life. He did his own shopping and would regularly visit the old people's centre at Gee Cross.
Mrs McEvilly mentions that he was a heavy smoker.
It is recorded in Mr Stafford's Lloyd George notes that he suffered a small left-sided stroke in August 1988. There is an entry, dated 11th
August, as follows:
'V
(
visit
)
(L) minor CVA
(
cerebrovascular accident
)
140/90 (L) hand affected sensation
Power
a little
Prostate problem - dribble
emptying technique'
.
There is no record of any follow-up visit or appointment. The next entry in the medical records is dated 17th
December 1988, the date of the death. Mr Stafford's name and address appear in the visits book for 14th
November 1988 but there is no corresponding entry in the medical records.
On Friday, 16th
December, Mrs McEvilly saw Mr Stafford outside his house. He said he had a cold and was 'feeling dreadful'. He thought the cold was going to his chest. He said that he was intending to spend Christmas with his son, who lived in Northwich, but that, due to his cold, he was not sure that he would be well enough to go. Mrs McEvilly does not recall that Mr Stafford mentioned a visit from the doctor.
The Day of the Death
Mr Stafford telephoned his daughter-in-law at about 9.30am on 17th
December 1988. He told her he had a heavy cold. Mrs Stafford said that, as he was coming to stay over Christmas in any event, he should come over earlier than had been intended. When her husband had finished playing golf, she would ask him to drive over to Hyde and collect Mr Stafford. Mrs Stafford recalls that Mr Stafford mentioned the doctor, but is not sure whether he said that he had seen the doctor the day before or was expecting him that day. In the light of subsequent events, and as Mr Stafford's name appears in Shipman's visits book for that day, it seems the latter is more likely.
Mrs McEvilly was at home on 17th
December. Her recollection is that it was about lunchtime when, looking through her front room window, she saw Shipman approach Mr Stafford's front door and walk straight in. She thought Mr Stafford's cold must be worse and she decided to visit him when Shipman had gone. In the light of other evidence, I think it likely that Mrs McEvilly is probably mistaken in her estimate of the time of this event. I think Shipman probably arrived at about 10.30am. After some time, she cannot say how long, Mrs McEvilly saw Shipman leave Mr Stafford's house and knock on the front doors of the first two houses on the left-hand side of Rock Street. He then crossed over the road and knocked on the door of a house opposite, apparently with no response.
Shipman then came to Mrs McEvilly's front door and told her that Mr Stafford had telephoned to request a visit. Mr Stafford had said to Shipman that he would leave the front door open so that Shipman could let himself into the house. Shipman said to Mrs McEvilly that Mr Stafford was unwell and asked her to accompany him to Mr Stafford's house. When they arrived, Mrs McEvilly saw Mr Stafford sitting in his usual armchair, with the outward appearance of being asleep, his head tilted to one side. His arms were resting on the arms of the chair. He was wearing his usual daytime clothes. Shipman then apologised to Mrs McEvilly and said that he had not told her the truth when he had said that Mr Stafford was unwell. He had in fact died. Mrs McEvilly thought it strange that he had not told her immediately that Mr Stafford had died. Shipman did not examine Mr Stafford in Mrs McEvilly's presence, nor did he attempt to resuscitate him. He did not telephone for the emergency services. Mrs McEvilly thinks that Shipman said that Mr Stafford had died 'due to his heart'.
Shipman asked Mrs McEvilly whether she knew Mr Stafford's relatives. They went into the kitchen and found the telephone number for Mr and Mrs Ted Stafford. Shipman telephoned and informed Mrs Stafford of the death. He then said that he was leaving and told Mrs McEvilly to telephone the family and ask if they wanted her to arrange for an undertaker to attend. She describes Shipman as being very calm and matter-of-fact in his approach. Mrs McEvilly telephoned the Stafford home in Northwich and then arranged for a local firm of undertakers to collect Mr Stafford's body.
Mrs Stafford's recollection is that these events took place rather earlier in the day than Mrs McEvilly suggests. She recalls that Shipman telephoned between 10.30am and 11am. He introduced himself and said that Mr Stafford had died. He explained that Mr Stafford had answered the door, they had gone into the house and Mr Stafford had sat down in his chair. After a few minutes, he had collapsed and died. Mrs Stafford then went to the golf course to find her husband. Mr Ted Stafford recalls that his wife found him at about 11am. By the time he reached his father's house, the body had been removed.
The following entry appears in the Lloyd George notes dated 17th
December:
'V
(
visit
)
history of dyspnoea for 48 hours
and central chest pain
(L) arm
cyanosed
70/40 Resp rate 36/m basal creps
JVP
HR 40-50/m irregular
no ankle oedema
CT with LVF
Patient died 11.00 hours
IV
{Cyclimorph stat
{ LASIX 80mg'
.
This note suggests that Mr Stafford gave a history of breathlessness for 48 hours and central chest pain radiating to the left arm. He was seen to be very cyanosed. His blood pressure was very low at 70/40. His respiration rate was 36 breaths per minute, which is fast. Shipman heard crepitations at the base of the lungs. He found that the jugular venous pressure was raised. The heart rate was 40 to 50 beats per minute and irregular. There was no ankle oedema. Shipman diagnosed coronary thrombosis with left ventricular failure. Shipman administered Cyclimorph (morphine) and Lasix (80mg) by intravenous injection. The patient died at 11am. If the history and observations were genuine, Shipman's diagnosis was reasonable and the treatment appropriate, provided that only a very small dose of Cyclimorph was given for the relief of pain. However, the questions must arise whether or not the entry is a genuine account and whether Shipman gave a small dose of Cyclimorph or a large dose of some other opiate, possibly diamorphine.
The Aftermath
Mr Ted Stafford visited Shipman's surgery on Monday, 19th
December, to ask him why his father had died so suddenly. Shipman explained that Mr Stafford had telephoned to request a visit and, when Shipman arrived, he was having a massive heart attack. Shipman said there was nothing he could do and that Mr Stafford had died peacefully.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been recovered. This records that Shipman last saw Mr Stafford alive on the day of his death, that he also saw the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination. The cause of death was said to be left ventricular failure due to coronary thrombosis.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He said that the time of death was 11am. He said he had attended Mr Stafford during his last illness for
'30 minutes or so'
. He said he had last seen Mr Stafford alive half an hour before death and immediately after death. After some alteration, the causes of death were as stated on the MCCD counterfoil and the mode of death was said to be syncope of minutes' duration. He also said that he and a neighbour had been present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered the cremation forms and concluded that the death of Mr Stafford was highly suspicious, and then separately considered the medical records and reached the same conclusion.
Conclusion
There are several highly suspicious circumstances surrounding this death. The first and most obvious is that Mr Stafford died in Shipman's presence. Mr Stafford had almost certainly called Shipman out because he was suffering from a cold. There is no evidence that Shipman was called out because Mr Stafford was suffering from chest pain. At about 9.30am, almost certainly after he had asked Shipman to visit, Mr Stafford told his daughter-in-law that he had a bad cold. If he had had chest pain, I think he would have told her. In his generic evidence, Dr John Grenville has said that it is most unusual for a patient to die in the presence of his general practitioner during the course of a visit not arranged as an emergency. With Shipman this happened quite frequently and the event gives rise to a strong suspicion that Shipman has caused the death.
The history recorded by Shipman in the Lloyd George notes describes a patient suffering from acute heart failure. If this were a genuine note, it would mean that Mr Stafford had suffered a sudden and catastrophic deterioration in the short period between speaking to Mrs Stafford and Shipman's arrival, which appears to have been at about 10.30am. In my view, it is highly likely that Shipman's note of the consultation is fabricated.
I am further persuaded to that view by consideration of the note itself. It appears that, when Shipman commenced his clinical examination, Mr Stafford was able to give a history and to submit to examination of his pulse, chest and blood pressure. From the observations recorded, one would expect a reasonable doctor to realise that his patient was seriously ill, and the usual and proper response would be to summon an ambulance. Shipman did not do so even when Mr Stafford collapsed. Nor did he attempt resuscitation. Those are not the actions of a reasonable doctor acting honestly in the best interests of his or her patient.
Shipman claimed, although this cannot be verified, that he gave appropriate treatment in the form of intravenous Cyclimorph and Lasix. However, when Shipman was arrested in 1998, he claimed that he did not routinely carry controlled drugs in his bag. He claimed that he had never done so since his conviction for pethidine abuse in the 1970s. However, it is now known that he did carry diamorphine and used it to kill his patients. That Shipman should claim to have injected an unspecified amount of Cyclimorph into a patient who died soon afterwards is highly suspicious.
Mr Stafford's position and appearance in death are not typical of what is to be expected after a death from left ventricular failure or coronary thrombosis. However, his appearance was entirely typical of that of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of opiate.
Shipman told a lie on cremation Form B, when he said that Mrs McEvilly was present at the moment of death. She was not, as he himself admitted to her when he apologised for not telling her immediately that Mr Stafford had died. In my view, this entry on Form B was designed to create the impression that others were involved at the time of the fatal episode, when the truth is that Shipman was alone with Mr Stafford throughout.
Everything points to the conclusion that Shipman must have killed Mr Stafford. I am sure that he did so, almost certainly by injecting him with a lethal dose of diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001