The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Grace Sumner
Introduction
Mrs Grace Sumner died at Tameside General Hospital on Tuesday, 12th
November 1996 at the age of 60. She had been a patient of Shipman since February 1996. A hospital doctor, Dr S Ahmad, certified that the cause of her death was myocardial infarction due to ischaemic heart disease.
In September 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, members of Mrs Sumner's family expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of Mrs Sumner's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Sumner's husband, Mr Alan Sumner, and from her daughter, Mrs Elizabeth Mulcahy.
An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Sumner and Mrs Mulcahy and has obtained statements from Mrs Patricia Krommendijk, Mrs Julie Gates, Mr James Fearns, Mr Paul Fearns, Mr Mark Fearns and Mr Alan Fearns (Mrs Sumner's children) and Mrs Gillian Morgan (the practice nurse at Shipman's Market Street Surgery). The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Sumner's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Sumner has been described by her family as a very active lady who worked until the age of 60. She married Mr Sumner in November 1994. Her medical records show that she had hyperlipidaemia (raised blood fats) which put her at a higher risk than normal of suffering a heart attack. In July 1995, she developed crushing chest pains, associated with exercise, and was referred to Dr P S Lewis, consultant cardiovascular physician at Stepping Hill Hospital, Stockport. He considered that the chest pains were suggestive of angina but investigations also demonstrated that she had a hiatus hernia, which could have caused her chest pain. As an exercise electrocardiogram (ECG) was normal, it was thought that ischaemic heart disease was not a significant factor. However, I note that she continued to suffer chest pain during the remainder of 1995, although this was relieved by the use of a nitrolingual spray, which suggests that the pain might well have been related to her heart rather than her hiatus hernia.
In February 1996, Mr and Mrs Sumner moved to 10 Bankfield, Flowery Field, Hyde. Although Mr Sumner recalls that he and his wife registered with Shipman at this time, Mrs Sumner's medical records suggest that she registered at the Clarendon Surgery when she first moved to Hyde. From the records, it appears that she did not transfer to Shipman until later in the year, possibly even as late as October 1996. Be that as it may, the records demonstrate that Mrs Sumner was well and had only a minor problem with her bowels.
The records suggest that Mrs Sumner only had one consultation with Shipman at the surgery. That was on 22nd
October 1996 when he gave her a 'new patient' check. Mr Sumner recalls that Shipman found her blood pressure was rather high. That is confirmed by the record, which shows it was 150/96. Her children have told the Inquiry that they were aware that their mother was taking medication for high blood pressure but thought she was otherwise in good health. Her medical records reveal that she also suffered from asthma.
The Day of the Death
On 11th
November 1996, Mr and Mrs Sumner attended the Market Street Surgery for an appointment with Mrs Morgan. The main purpose of this visit was to have booster anti-tetanus injections as preparation for their forthcoming cruise along the Nile. The practice nurse's diary reveals that Mr Sumner was due to see her at 10am and that Mrs Sumner's appointment was for 10.20am. In fact, they went in to see her together. Mr Sumner had his injection first and was present when his wife had hers. Mrs Morgan said that she wanted to check Mrs Sumner's blood pressure and conduct various other procedures. It was decided that Mrs Sumner would remain for these and Mr Sumner would go home.
The computerised medical record contains notes of the various procedures carried out by Mrs Morgan. Mrs Sumner's asthma was checked and blood samples were taken for analysis at the hospital laboratory. An audit check on the times at which the various notes were made shows them to have been entered consecutively between 10.05am and 10.42am, most probably as the procedures were carried out by the nurse. There is no evidence in the surgery documentation to suggest that Mrs Sumner saw Shipman that day. Nor does Mr Sumner recall that, when his wife returned home, she said anything about having seen Shipman. The computerised medical record indicates that Mrs Sumner requested a repeat prescription, which would have had to be signed by Shipman, but that would not imply that she had seen him. Had she seen him, it is likely that this would have been recorded on the daily appointments sheet.
According to Mr Sumner, Mrs Sumner did some shopping after leaving the surgery and returned home at about 12.30pm. She ate a sandwich for lunch and made no mention of feeling unwell. Later that afternoon, however, she told her husband that she had felt 'rotten' all day. She kept rubbing her chest. As she started to wash up in the kitchen at about 6pm, she developed pain in her chest in the area of her heart and sat down on the settee. Mr Sumner could see that she was sweating, that her face was pale and that she was gasping for breath. She also complained of a loss of feeling in her left arm.
Mr Sumner telephoned for an ambulance and Mrs Sumner was taken to Tameside General Hospital. The hospital records reveal that she was injected intravenously with 5mg diamorphine on her arrival at the accident and emergency department. That would have been to relieve her pain. Mr Sumner contacted his wife's daughter, Mrs Gates, and possibly her other children. At some time after her admission and when her family had begun to gather at the hospital, Mrs Sumner said something to her children which has formed the basis of their concern that her death might, in some way, be related to Shipman. Mrs Sumner was on a bed in a corridor and was about to be taken to the intensive therapy unit. Her children were allowed to see her in pairs. First to see her were Mrs Mulcahy and Mr Mark Fearns. Mrs Mulcahy initially told the police that her mother told her that she had had an injection that morning at the doctor's surgery. Mrs Mulcahy told the Inquiry that her mother said, 'He's given me an injection.' She said that at the time she assumed that her mother meant a doctor at the hospital and she now wishes that she had realised that she meant Shipman. Mr Mark Fearns' recollection is that his mother said, 'That doctor gave me an injection. Find out what it was'. Mr Paul Fearns says that Mrs Sumner said to him that she had seen a doctor and the doctor had given her an injection. He says that he assumed that she meant her own doctor and not a doctor at the hospital. Mrs Gates recalls that she went in with her brother Paul and that her mother told them that she had had a tetanus injection that morning. Mrs Krommendijk does not recall that her mother said anything directly to her about having an injection but she does recall her sister Julie talking about it. Mr James Fearns says that his mother did not say anything about going to the surgery earlier that day. Mr Alan Fearns was in the army and was stationed in Lichfield in November 1996. He arrived later than his siblings and his mother did not speak to him about an injection. Nor, it seems, did Mrs Sumner express any concern about it to her husband.
While the family was at the hospital that evening, a doctor told them that Mrs Sumner had had a heart attack and said that she had ischaemic heart disease. Mrs Mulcahy asked the doctor whether her mother's condition could have been in any way related to her tetanus vaccination but the consultant said that it could not. Mrs Mulcahy stayed at the hospital throughout the night with her brother Mr Alan Fearns. At about 5.50am, they were informed that Mrs Sumner had died.
Dr Ahmad certified that the death was due to a myocardial infarction, which had been caused by ischaemic heart disease.
The Aftermath
Despite the reassurance given to them by the doctor at Tameside General Hospital, Mrs Sumner's family became very anxious in September 1998, when they learned that Shipman was under suspicion of murder. Their suspicions grew when they later learned that Mrs Sumner's medical records had been found in a Kleenex box at Shipman's home.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville has examined all the medical records, including those from Tameside General Hospital. He says that the history recorded by the admitting medical officer was entirely suggestive of an acute myocardial infarct or heart attack. The diagnosis was confirmed by ECG. He says that there can be no doubt that Mrs Sumner died as a result of the heart attack. He also says that the tetanus injection could not have been responsible for the heart attack. Dr Grenville points out that there is no evidence that Mrs Sumner saw Shipman on the morning of her death. In any event, even if she had, Dr Grenville cannot think of anything which Shipman could have done to her or given her, which could have caused her to have a heart attack later in the day.
Conclusion
I am quite sure that Mrs Sumner died a natural death following a heart attack. In 1995, she had a history which was highly suggestive of angina and ischaemic heart disease, although the diagnosis was not proved. I am sure that in 1996 she was at an increased risk of sudden death from heart disease.
There is no evidence that Mrs Sumner saw Shipman on the day of her death. The fact that Mrs Sumner was able to go shopping after visiting the surgery, return home, make lunch and spend the afternoon going about her usual tasks, indicates that she cannot have been given any lethal or sub-lethal injection that morning at the surgery. The effect of an overdose of opiate or sedative is to make the victim fall asleep quite soon after its administration.
The symptoms described by Mr Sumner are those typical of the onset of a myocardial infarction and the diagnosis was confirmed by ECG.
Mrs Sumner's remarks to her children about the fact that she had been given an injection that day or that morning should not give rise to any cause for concern. It seems that at the time, the family thought that Mrs Sumner was referring either to her tetanus injection that morning or to an injection she had been given since her arrival at the hospital. I think it is only since they have realised the possible significance of an injection given by Shipman that they have been concerned that Shipman might have played some part in their mother's death. It is also possible, as Dr Grenville has suggested, that Mrs Sumner was a little confused that evening, as she had just been given some morphine to ease her pain. It is possible that she did not explain herself very clearly. It is also possible that Mrs Sumner herself, not truly appreciating the nature of her illness, linked its sudden onset with the injection she had had earlier that morning. It is clear, however, from the medical evidence that no such link exists in this case.
The family has raised concern over the fact that Mrs Sumner's medical records were found at Shipman's home. At an early stage in the investigations, the Inquiry legal team shared that concern, as there can be no doubt that Shipman's possession of medical records of deceased patients was highly unorthodox. However, the team examined those cases in which the only reason the death had come to the attention of the police was that the records had been found at Shipman's house. That exercise revealed that many of the deaths were wholly unconnected with Shipman, having occurred, for example, after a stay in hospital or for reasons that were conclusively established by post-mortem examination. It was clear, from that examination, that there was no overall pattern to Shipman's retention of records. The Inquiry team's initial suspicion, that there might be something sinister about the deaths of patients whose records were found at his home, was not confirmed.
I hope the investigation of Mrs Sumner's death and this decision will have served to put the minds of her family at rest.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001