The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Alice Smith
Introduction
Mrs Mary Alice Smith was found dead at her third floor flat at Chartist House, on Wednesday, 18th
May 1994 at the age of 84. She was a widow and lived alone. She lived in the part of the building where the residents had the benefit of supervision by the resident warden, Mrs Jennifer Unsworth. Mrs Smith had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and she had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She had a high regard for him. He certified that the cause of her death was carcinoma of the bronchus.
Mrs Smith's death came to the attention of the police when her name was seen in the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy controlled drugs register and it was realised that she had been prescribed a quantity of diamorphine. The police took statements from Mrs Marian Woodhouse and Mrs Rita Wareham (Mrs Smith's stepdaughters), Mr Alfred Warhurst (Mrs Smith's brother), Mrs Unsworth, Mrs Elizabeth Adie (a health care co-ordinator with the Tameside and Glossop Community and Priority NHS Trust) and Mrs Ghislaine Brant (a pharmacist at the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy). They also obtained a statement from Dr John Grenville.
There was no prosecution in connection with Mrs Smith's death but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Woodhouse, Mrs Wareham, Mrs Unsworth and Mr Warhurst. Mrs Woodhouse, Mrs Wareham and Mrs Unsworth gave oral evidence at a hearing on 24th
October 2001. Dr Grenville gave evidence on 19th
November 2001. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Smith's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents covering the relevant period.
Personal Background
Although Mrs Smith lived alone, her stepdaughters visited her very regularly. They have told the Inquiry that, until shortly before her death, Mrs Smith enjoyed quite good health and lived a very active life. Over the years, Mrs Smith had been diagnosed as having a hiatus hernia with gastro-oesophageal reflux, osteoporosis and congestive heart failure. The diagnosis of congestive heart failure was made by Shipman. Dr Grenville, who examined the medical records, considered that there was no good evidence of congestive heart failure. He did not think that Mrs Smith was at high risk of suffering a heart attack or a stroke on account of her medical history.
The Incident of 31st
August 1993
An unusual incident occurred, probably on 31st
August 1993, which led, indirectly, to the discovery later that year that Mrs Smith was suffering from lung cancer. Mrs Wareham described to the Inquiry how she and her sister, Mrs Woodhouse, arrived at Mrs Smith's flat, at about 2pm one afternoon, to find Mrs Smith sitting upright and unconscious on the settee, and Shipman, who was alone in the flat with her, leaning over the back of the settee with his back to them. He seemed surprised to see the two ladies and explained to them that Mrs Smith had collapsed. He then carried her to her bed. According to Mrs Wareham, he might have given her an injection, although she has no recollection of seeing him do so. Both women are adamant that Shipman did not do anything physical to Mrs Smith which might have represented external cardiac massage. Shipman told Mrs Smith's stepdaughters that she might wake up and ask for a cup of tea or she might not wake up at all. He told them that she had heart failure and that had caused her collapse. Shipman went on to say that, if they needed a doctor during the night, they should telephone him rather than the emergency doctor. He gave them his private telephone number. They thought he was very caring.
Mrs Woodhouse gave a similar account of this event in oral evidence. However, some doubt must be cast on the validity of her recollection as, when she first described this incident to a member of the Inquiry team, over the telephone, she seemed to remember that Shipman might have found her stepmother on the floor and helped her into bed. She and her sister were summoned by Mrs Unsworth, the warden, and when they arrived, found Mrs Smith in bed. Shipman was not present. On his return, he told them that Mrs Smith had heart failure and might not survive the night. I must approach Mrs Woodhouse's evidence with some caution, bearing in mind the differences between her two accounts.
Both Mrs Woodhouse and Mrs Wareham agree that, after this incident, they stayed the night with Mrs Smith. She woke up at about 7am the following day and asked them what they were doing there. She was 'as right as rain'.
I say that this incident probably occurred on 31st
August 1993 because on that date there is an entry in the visits book relating to Mrs Smith which reads
'URGENT VISIT'
. It is not known who requested a visit that day. Mrs Unsworth does not recall doing so, although she might have done. Mrs Smith probably did not do it herself, as she had no telephone in her flat. However, it appears that someone thought an urgent visit was necessary.
In the medical records for that day, Shipman made two manuscript notes. The first reads:
'c/o Chest pain dyspnoea
A/E
very wheezy
Aerolin
Aerobec
Steroid
HS I II no failure
pain
(L) arm all of chest
?CT lasted 20 minutes sweaty
review later today'
.
From this it appears that Shipman found Mrs Smith complaining of chest pain and breathlessness. He suspected that she might have had a coronary thrombosis and decided to review her later in the day. Dr Grenville says that, if Shipman thought that she might have had an incomplete coronary thrombosis, he should have admitted her to hospital.
There is then what appears to be a note of a second visit, which reads:
'V
(
visit
)
Collapsed ECM x 1
(
external cardiac massage, probably one cycle of massage, meaning a thump on the chest followed by 15 compressions of the chest and two exhalations into the patient's lungs
)
cyanosed
14.20
(illegible)
neighbours present
'
.
This seems to be the occasion on which Mrs Woodhouse and Mrs Wareham arrived. It is a very strange note for several reasons. If Mrs Smith had had a suspected coronary thrombosis earlier in the day and if she had gone into cardiac arrest as seems to be implied by the note, then it is remarkable that Shipman did not arrange to admit Mrs Smith to hospital. There is no note of any treatment, such as an injection, and no explanation as to why Mrs Smith was not admitted to hospital, as she should have been. The note also gives rise to the suspicion that Mrs Smith collapsed during Shipman's visit. This is something that other doctors find does not happen very often, but seems to have happened very frequently with Shipman. It gives rise to suspicion.
There is a note in the district nurses' diary indicating that Shipman asked them to call on Mrs Smith. Mrs Woodhouse and Mrs Wareham say that no nurse attended while they were there.
Although there is no note, it seems that Shipman called on Mrs Smith the next day, and again on 2nd
September. He also visited on 4th
September, when he recorded in the notes
'All OK'
. Despite the diagnosis of a coronary thrombosis, he did not refer Mrs Smith to hospital and it was not until 15th
September that he decided to ask for a domiciliary visit from Dr M A Matin, a consultant geriatrician. On that day Shipman's note reads:
'DV
Innovace
Diurexan
30
(
30 mg
)
T OD
(
tablet once daily
)
'
.
On 17th
September 1993, Dr Matin visited Mrs Smith at her flat. In a letter to Shipman following his consultation, Dr Matin describes the incident in terms which are different from those described by Mrs Wareham and Mrs Woodhouse, and also quite different from those appearing in Shipman's note. Dr Matin said:
'She tripped over a few days ago and was on the floor for a long time when you called to see her and helped her into bed. She remained listless for about 24 hours but has now gradually recovered'
.
Whether that account was given to Dr Matin by Shipman or by Mrs Smith is not known.
The whole episode is very strange and gives rise to a suspicion that Shipman might have tried to kill Mrs Smith on 31st
August. Dr Grenville has considered whether it is possible that Shipman had given Mrs Smith an injection of diamorphine shortly before he was disturbed by the arrival of her two stepdaughters. He says that Shipman cannot have given a completed injection of a lethal dose, as Mrs Smith survived. There is an antidote to diamorphine, Narcan, but if administered successfully, it would have had the effect of bringing Mrs Smith round quite quickly. The fact that Mrs Smith slept until the following morning is not consistent with the successful use of Narcan. Dr Grenville says that it is possible that Shipman had begun to give Mrs Smith an injection but was interrupted by the arrival of her stepdaughters and withdrew the needle. Shipman would then be unsure whether or not Mrs Smith would survive. This is consistent with Mrs Wareham's recollection of what Shipman said. It seems to me that this is a possible explanation for the events of that day. The circumstances are highly suspicious, but I do not think it is possible to reach any satisfactory conclusion as to whether or not this incident was an attempt on Mrs Smith's life.
The Course of Events Leading up to Death
On 17th
September 1993, when Dr Matin saw Mrs Smith, she was complaining of pins and needles in both arms with palpitations and shaking all over. She lacked energy. Dr Matin found that her blood pressure was low and thought it possible that her collapse had been caused by hypotension. An electrocardiogram (ECG) established that she had not suffered a recent myocardial infarction.
On 11th
October 1993, Mrs Smith attended hospital where she was seen by Dr Matin's registrar, Dr Peters. He stated that Mrs Smith's hypotension was better after the discontinuance of the medication that she had recently been prescribed for congestive heart failure. She was said to be
'still not quite right on her feet'
. She was also complaining of back pain in the mid-thoracic area. On examination, her blood pressure was too high and she had some oedema of the legs, which had started since her diuretic medication had been discontinued. Dr Peters concluded that she was suffering from hypertensive heart disease, fluid retention leading to peripheral oedema and suspected osteoporosis over the thoracic spine.
An x-ray taken some time later revealed an opacity on the left side of the chest and Mrs Smith was referred for bronchoscopic examination. By the time she saw Dr Chopra, a consultant chest physician, she was complaining of breathlessness, a non-productive cough and weight loss. Dr Chopra suspected that there was an underlying carcinoma of the bronchus and carried out a bronchoscopy on 18th November, which confirmed the diagnosis of a left main bronchial carcinoma. The cancer was very advanced when it was diagnosed and it had caused complete collapse of the left lung. Mrs Smith received specialised radiotherapy at the Christie Hospital and, as a result, the lung re-expanded. However, the treatment was never expected to be curative.
In January 1994, Mrs Smith was seen again at hospital and was said to have shown
'an excellent response to treatment'
. Her cough and breathlessness had improved considerably; she remained
'frail'
, however,
'with a poor appetite and weight loss'
. She was said to be stable in February but by 27th
April 1994 it appears that she was suffering pain on breathing and Shipman prescribed slow-release morphine tablets.
Meanwhile, Mrs Woodhouse and Mrs Wareham visited Mrs Smith every day during her illness. They helped her with her housework, did her shopping and attended to her bills. She was not bed bound and was able to wash and dress herself and do some dusting and hoovering. She accompanied her stepdaughters shopping once a week and they would have lunch out.
On 4th
May 1994, it was recorded in the Lloyd George cards that Mrs Smith was suffering from dysphagia, which is difficulty in swallowing. Two days later, she attended the outpatients' clinic again. She was noted to be deteriorating and was complaining of worsening shortness of breath and dysphagia to solid foods. A chest x-ray showed marked disease progression. She was to be admitted to the Christie Hospital for consideration of further external radiotherapy.
A week or two before she died, Mrs Smith went shopping with her stepdaughters and bought a new outfit for her son's wedding. On 12th
May, Shipman visited Mrs Smith and prescribed Ensure, a liquid protein drink, and a cough suppressant. On 14th
May, Mrs Smith attended her son's wedding and stayed at the celebrations from 11am until after 11pm.
The Last Two Days
The events of the last two days of Mrs Smith's life are somewhat unclear.
In the statement that Mrs Woodhouse gave to the police in February 1999, she told them that she had visited Mrs Smith at about teatime on Tuesday, 17th
May 1994. Mrs Smith told her that Shipman had called earlier that day and had arranged for her to be admitted to a hospice the next day. Mrs Woodhouse said that Mrs Smith told her that she was feeling very tired and was going to bed. She did not want Mrs Woodhouse to visit again that evening. She did not mention that Shipman was expected to revisit later that day.
In her Inquiry statement and in her oral evidence, Mrs Woodhouse said that Shipman called on Mrs Smith after lunch on Monday, 16th
May and the consultation took place in her (Mrs Woodhouse's) presence. Shipman told Mrs Smith that he had arranged for her to go into St Ann's Hospice and said that he would call her the next day to say what time on the Wednesday she was to be picked up and taken to the hospice. There is no record of the visit described by Mrs Woodhouse in the practice records for the day, nor is there a manuscript or computerised note of it.
In evidence to the Inquiry, Mrs Woodhouse said that she arrived at Mrs Smith's flat at about 10am on the Tuesday and stayed until about 4pm. Shipman did not attend. When she left, Mrs Smith was sitting with her brother, who had called to see her. Mrs Woodhouse described Mrs Smith's condition on that day as being 'okay'. It was Mrs Woodhouse's view that Mrs Smith was still very independent and not in the terminal phase of her illness such as to necessitate a hospice admission. She was up and dressed, had done some light housework and ate some new potatoes for lunch. She recalls that Mrs Smith seemed to accept that she would have to go to the hospice, at any rate, after being reassured that her stepdaughters would still visit her regularly. Here again, Mrs Woodhouse's recollection conflicts with the medical records. There is a note in the computerised records of a visit on the Tuesday, at which it is said that Shipman had a chat with Mrs Smith about a hospice. It appears to me likely that Mrs Woodhouse's first account, as given to the police in 1999, is a more accurate recollection than her account as given to the Inquiry. I think it probable that Shipman visited on Tuesday, 17th May, at which time Mrs Woodhouse was not present. I think it likely that Mrs Woodhouse visited Mrs Smith at some time in the afternoon and heard about Shipman's visit from Mrs Smith. Mrs Woodhouse then stayed until Mrs Smith's brother arrived. That conclusion would fit with the evidence of Mrs Wareham to which I am about to refer. I think Mrs Woodhouse's recollection of Mrs Smith's condition and activities that day is mistaken.
Mrs Wareham says that she also visited Mrs Smith on Monday, 16th
May, but has no recollection of a visit by Shipman while she was there. She recalls that, on Tuesday, 17th
May, Mrs Woodhouse telephoned to say that Shipman had told Mrs Smith that she would be going into a hospice on the Wednesday. Shipman was to come back later that day (Tuesday) to let Mrs Smith know the time at which she would be collected. Mrs Wareham did not visit Mrs Smith on the Tuesday.
Mr Warhurst says he arrived at about 4pm on Tuesday, 17th
May and stayed for about an hour. His recollection is that both Mrs Smith's stepdaughters were there when he arrived but they left soon afterwards. Shipman did not visit while Mr Warhurst was there. Mr Warhurst told the police that Mrs Smith was not well that day. However, he told the Inquiry that she was as well as she had been at the time of his previous visit a few days earlier. He said that Mrs Smith did not mention that she was to go into a hospice the next day and did not say that she was expecting a visit from Shipman.
I have already referred to a note in the computerised records for 17th
May recording a visit at which Shipman talked to Mrs Smith about a hospice. That visit does not appear in the visits book.
There are two manuscript notes for 17th
May. The first records a prescription for sodium chloride 20ml, 10 doses; Nozinan 25mg/ml, 10 doses; and diamorphine 100mg by driver. This implied that Mrs Smith was to have a syringe driver. No such driver had been issued to her by the time of her death and indeed there was no recent district nurse involvement. The controlled drugs register of the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy records that the prescription was dispensed the same day. As that note is clearly designed to suggest that Mrs Smith was to have a syringe driver and as she never did have one, I infer that Shipman was using Mrs Smith's name and the nature of her illness to obtain a large amount of diamorphine for his own purposes. Although this conduct was almost certainly illegal, it does not necessarily help me to decide whether Shipman killed Mrs Smith. However, it does demonstrate that he had a plentiful supply of diamorphine by the evening of 17th
May.
The second manuscript note for the same date reads:
'Very poor state.
Slightly cyanosed. Air entry
ankle oedema
review mane'
.
It is not clear whether or not this manuscript record is intended to refer to the same visit as was recorded in the computerised record as covering only a chat about a hospice. It is possible that it was intended to refer to that visit or to a second visit that day. It is also possible that it was intended to be unclear what it referred to. Dr Grenville said that this entry, if genuine, would show that Mrs Smith was reaching the terminal stage of her illness. The question must arise as to whether Shipman did indeed call on Mrs Smith after Mr Warhurst had left. If he did so, it must have been after his evening surgery, which would normally begin at 3.45pm or 4pm and would continue until about 6pm.
The hospice has no record of a referral of Mrs Smith by Shipman but it would not hold such a record if the referral were made by telephone rather than in writing.
Mrs Unsworth recalls Mrs Smith and her stepdaughters but does not remember any suggestion that Mrs Smith should be admitted to a hospice. She said that Shipman would have told her if he had definite plans to move a resident into a hospice for terminal care but not if he was only thinking about it. Her impression was that Mrs Smith had not yet reached the terminal stage of her illness and was not yet in need of a hospice.
The Discovery of the Death
At about 8.30am on Wednesday, 18th
May, Mrs Woodhouse received a telephone call from Mrs Unsworth, the warden at Chartist House, stating that she had found Mrs Smith dead. The death came as a shock to Mrs Woodhouse and to other members of the family. Mrs Unsworth has no recollection of finding Mrs Smith. Mrs Woodhouse asked her husband to telephone her sister and Mrs Smith's brother, Mr Warhurst, and then set off for Mrs Smith's flat. Mrs Unsworth was there. Mrs Smith was sitting on the settee. She was wearing the same clothes as the previous day. Mrs Woodhouse recalls that Mrs Smith's eyes were open but she looked peaceful, as if she was asleep. Mrs Unsworth telephoned Shipman to tell him of the death and the call is recorded in the visits book. The entry reads:
'Warden. VISIT. Thinks she dead in chair'
.
In due course, Mrs Wareham and Mr Warhurst arrived at the flat. Mrs Woodhouse recalls that Mrs Smith's purse was open on the settee. Mr Warhurst recalls that Mrs Smith's mouth was wide open and her dentures were in her hand. He had the impression that she had been getting ready to go to bed and had collapsed backwards onto the settee. Neither Mrs Woodhouse nor Mrs Wareham recalls the dentures being out of Mrs Smith's mouth. Shipman did not attend for some time and Mrs Woodhouse telephoned the surgery. He eventually came between about 12.30pm and 1pm. On entering the room, he closed Mrs Smith's eyes from behind her. He made no examination of Mrs Smith but gave the family the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and left within a very short time. There was no mention of any need for a post-mortem examination.
Mrs Woodhouse says that she estimates that about £20 was missing from Mrs Smith's purse and that a string of pearls was also missing. These were good pearls and Mrs Smith had worn them at the wedding on the previous Saturday.
Shipman's manuscript note of the visit reads:
'Died MNight 17/5/94.
found by Jennie the Warden
Brother. present.
D.C.
Carcinoma bronchus'
.
There is no computerised note relating to the death.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. Shipman completed that on 18th
May and stated that Mrs Smith had died at Chartist House on 17th
May 1994. He said that he had last seen her alive on the day of the death. He stated that he had seen the body after death and said that there would not be a post-mortem examination. He said that the cause of death was carcinoma of the bronchus.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated the time of death as
'About midnight 17 5 94'
. He stated also that he attended Mrs Smith for six months during her last illness. He claimed to have seen her alive approximately 12 hours before her death, which on his timings would have been at about noon on 17th
May. He also stated that he saw the body about 11 hours after death and made a complete external examination. He said that the cause of death was carcinoma of the bronchus and that the mode of death was a coma lasting only hours. Shipman stated that his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and that Mrs Smith was
'found sat on settee - body temp etc would give 12 hrs before as time of death'
. He stated that no one nursed Mrs Smith during her last illness and no one was present at her death.
Shipman's Movements
The appointments sheet for 17th
May shows that Shipman was very busy during the morning and would probably not have started his visits until 1pm. He would then have been expected back in the surgery by about 3.50pm. The afternoon surgery and open surgery were busy and Shipman would not have finished until 6pm or 6.15pm.
Shipman had three patients to visit that day. One of them was Mr Ronnie Devenport, who was also a resident at Chartist House. He died nine days later. His records show that Shipman visited him on 17th
May but there is no evidence as to the time of the visit.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville is of the view that Mrs Smith had not yet reached the terminal phase of her illness. In saying this he relied not only on the evidence of what Mrs Smith had been able to do during the last few days of her life (which evidence might be inaccurate) but also on the willingness of the Christie Hospital to arrange further radiotherapy, which indicates that they expected her to live for some time yet. He also had the impression that Mrs Smith was not yet in need of terminal care in a hospice. He said that hospice care is sometimes arranged to give carers a respite or to establish the patient on an adequate pain relief regime, but neither of those possibilities appeared to apply in Mrs Smith's case.
Dr Grenville considered that the prescription for a large quantity of diamorphine issued and dispensed on the day of Mrs Smith's death was highly suspicious. The entry in the medical records suggests that Mrs Smith had reached the stage where she needed a syringe driver. The witnesses' evidence shows that she had not. It is rare for a syringe driver to be provided for a patient who is still mobile. It is very bad practice for a doctor to prescribe diamorphine for more than two or three days in advance. The patient's needs change from day to day. Dr Grenville says that the district nurses always take responsibility for the management of a syringe driver issued to a patient at home. There is no evidence of any involvement of the district nurses in Mrs Smith's case.
Dr Grenville was asked whether he could explain why there should have been a second manuscript note made on 17th
May. He suggested the possibility that Shipman might have learned that Mrs Smith was in very severe pain and had decided to issue a syringe driver. He had then gone round to see her again, possibly to give some pain relief, and had found her in a very poor state. However, this suggested explanation does not accord with the recollection of the witnesses. Nor does it make medical sense in that if Shipman really did find Mrs Smith in the very poor state he describes in the second note, he should have made some urgent arrangements for her to be cared for or at least not to be left alone.
Having expressed the view that Mrs Smith had not yet reached the terminal stage of her cancer, Dr Grenville was asked to consider other possible causes of sudden death. He thought it possible that she developed bronchopneumonia or had a heart attack but there was no evidence of these and no reason to think that the death was due to either of those causes.
In relation to Form B, Dr Grenville said that Shipman could not have estimated the time of death from the body temperature, as he claimed to do. It might be possible for a forensic pathologist to make a reasonably reliable estimate after taking a rectal temperature but Shipman would not have done this.
Professor Richard Baker assessed the level of suspicion in this case to be high upon his consideration of the medical records.
Conclusion
There are some highly suspicious circumstances surrounding this death.
Although I recognise that Mrs Smith was very unwell and suffering from a terminal illness, I am satisfied, from a consideration of all the evidence, that she had not yet reached the terminal phase of her diagnosed illness, lung cancer. In making that assessment, I have given no weight to the recollection of Mrs Woodhouse as to what Mrs Smith was able to do on 17th
May. I rely on the other evidence, including Mrs Smith's presence at the wedding on 12th
May and the recollection of Mrs Unsworth. Death from lung cancer on 17th
May 1994 was therefore unlikely, although not impossible. Although a sudden death from another cause cannot be ruled out, I think it is unlikely that Mrs Smith died of bronchopneumonia or a heart attack. Death from bronchopneumonia is usually preceded by at least several hours of obvious illness, which does not seem to have occurred in this case. Death by heart attack does not usually leave the victim sitting peacefully in a chair. I conclude therefore that this death at this time is not adequately explained.
When did Mrs Smith die? She was found on the morning of Wednesday, 18th
May but no one had tried to contact her after her brother had left at about 5pm the previous afternoon. Mrs Smith could have died at any time after 5pm on 17th
May. As she was found in the living room and was still wearing the same day clothes as she had worn throughout the Tuesday, it seems likely that she died (or at least deteriorated to the point where she could no longer move) before bedtime on the Tuesday.
We know that Shipman claims to have visited on the Tuesday and I have concluded that he probably did. Mrs Woodhouse says that he came on the Monday but not on the Tuesday. I have already said that I think she is mistaken. She may have confused the days, although she is now convinced that she has not. I think that Shipman would know that, when visiting a patient at Chartist House, there was always a real possibility that he would be noticed. I think he would not wish to create obvious disparities between his actions and his records, unless absolutely necessary. As Shipman had not planned to visit Mrs Smith that day, I think it likely that he called in on her while visiting Mr Ronnie Devenport. I think it likely that he visited in the middle of the day and talked to Mrs Smith about admission to a hospice. I am satisfied that there must have been some discussion about this with Mrs Smith, as otherwise Mrs Woodhouse would not have been aware of the proposal. I think Shipman might have promised to call back later in the day to tell Mrs Smith when she was to be collected. On the other hand, there might have been no discussion about that. It is possible that the discussion about a hospice might have been in more general terms than Mrs Woodhouse now recalls. It is quite likely that in the course of the conversation Shipman would have learned what the current arrangements were for Mrs Smith's care. He would then have known that she was managing on her own at night but usually had company during the day. It may well be that by this time Shipman was planning to kill Mrs Smith and wished to plant in the minds of her family the realisation that she had not long to live. Discussion about a hospice would have that effect. At some stage during that day, Shipman obtained a very large quantity of diamorphine in Mrs Smith's name. She did not need it and I am quite sure that he used her illness as a pretext for obtaining a large amount for his own purposes. However, later in the day he would certainly have been in a position to use some of it on her. Although there is no positive evidence of this, I think it quite likely that, after obtaining his supplies, he returned to Mrs Smith's flat in the early evening and gave her a lethal injection. In case he had been seen, which would always be possible in Chartist House, he made an entry in the records to suggest that Mrs Smith was deteriorating rapidly. This would enable him to demonstrate that her death was not as sudden as it might appear to others. This reconstruction fits all the known circumstances.
This account also fits in with the false claim Shipman made on Form B that he was able to estimate the time of death from the body temperature. He would wish to create the impression that the death had occurred some considerable time after his second visit.
I am suspicious about Shipman's second handwritten note made on 17th
May. If that were a genuine note, it would be most surprising that Shipman did not make any arrangements for Mrs Smith's care. I suspect that this note was not genuine but was designed to explain the otherwise unexpected death, which he knew would soon be discovered.
There are enough suspicious factors in this case to draw me to the conclusion that Shipman killed Mrs Smith. The evidence is not sufficiently clear for me to say that I am sure of this conclusion. However, I think it much more likely that he killed her than that she died of natural causes. I also suspect that Shipman might have taken Mrs Smith's pearls and some money from her purse but the evidence is not sufficiently clear for me to reach any firm conclusion on that issue.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001