The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Jane Elizabeth Shelmerdine
Introduction
Mrs Jane Elizabeth Shelmerdine died at her home, 9 Napier Street, Gee Cross, Hyde on Wednesday, 21st
February 1996 at the age of 80. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. Shipman certified the cause of her death to be left ventricular failure due to congestive heart failure.
In October 1998, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's arrest, Mrs Shelmerdine's son, Mr Roy Barrie Shelmerdine, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of his mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Shelmerdine, Mrs Margaret Shelmerdine (Mr Shelmerdine's wife), Miss Jennifer Shelmerdine (Mr Shelmerdine's sister) and Mrs Lillian Hough (of Fowdens undertakers).
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Shelmerdine but an inquest into her death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has obtained a further statement from Mr Shelmerdine. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Shelmerdine's general practitioner and hospital records, as well as appointments sheets, visits books and other contemporaneous documentation from the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Shelmerdine was a widow and lived alone. In 1985, she was diagnosed as suffering from breast cancer and underwent a mastectomy. The operation was successful and subsequent reviews revealed no evidence of recurrence of metastatic disease. In July 1995, she was still taking tamoxifen but it was decided by Shipman that it was no longer necessary for her to undergo an annual review.
Mr Shelmerdine recalls that Shipman told him that his mother had a slight heart complaint for which Shipman had prescribed tablets. The Lloyd George notes record a diagnosis of congestive heart failure in 1986, and further entries relating to congestive heart failure appear in the manuscript and computerised medical records on several occasions between November 1993 and December 1995. A printed drug record, dated 18th
August 1994, records that Mrs Shelmerdine was taking enalapril and frusemide tablets had been prescribed for the relief of congestive heart failure. The fact that she was taking enalapril would indicate that the congestive heart failure was moderate. An electrocardiograph (ECG), taken at Shipman's request in December 1993, was normal. It appears from the witness evidence, particularly that of Mr Shelmerdine that, if Mrs Shelmerdine did have congestive heart failure, it was not severe. She was able to lead an independent life. She had her own home. During her working life, she had been a manager in a garment factory and was a skilled tailoress. Until her death, she continued to make clothes and soft furnishings for friends and relatives.
The Period Leading up to Death
Mrs Shelmerdine spent Christmas 1995 with her son and daughter-in-law at their home in Nottinghamshire. Mr Shelmerdine describes his mother as having been 'very active and lively' over Christmas. In early January 1996, Mr Shelmerdine arranged for his doctor to visit his mother. A note made on 5th
January refers to pain in the right side of the chest. The doctor thought that the problem was muscular and advised Mrs Shelmerdine to take paracetamol.
In the second week of January 1996, Mr Shelmerdine took his mother back home to Hyde. On arrival, they found a burst water pipe, so Mrs Shelmerdine returned to her son's home until the repair was completed towards the end of February.
On 17th
January 1996, Mrs Shelmerdine saw the doctor in Nottingham. He recorded that she had a cough and prescribed amoxicillin, an antibiotic. A few days later, she saw the doctor again because she had swollen legs. Entries in the temporary resident notes dated 20th
and 22nd
January 1996 record bilateral, pitting ankle oedema, more pronounced in the right than the left ankle. The doctor diagnosed gravitational oedema. No medication was prescribed.
Over the weekend of 17th
and 18th
February, Mr Shelmerdine took his mother back to Hyde and recalls leaving her in 'high spirits'. In the light of the difficulties Mrs Shelmerdine had experienced while she had been away, Mr Shelmerdine advised his mother to telephone Shipman to request a visit.
The Day of the Death
It appears that Mrs Shelmerdine requested a visit on Wednesday, 21st
February. The surgery visits book for that day contains an entry, which reads:
'Jane Shelmerdine...
legs swollens
(
sic
)
(thrombosis? -DIED'
.
(
The word
'DIED'
is written in ink of a different colour from the rest of the entry and appears to have been written later
.)
In the late morning of 21st
February, Mrs Shelmerdine spoke to her daughter, Miss Shelmerdine, over the telephone. She mentioned that she was expecting a visit from Shipman. She said she had already had lunch and had eaten well, including a pudding. Then, while they were speaking, she said that Shipman had arrived and the call was cut short. Miss Shelmerdine is not sure of the exact time and the telephone billing records are no longer available. Doing her best, she thinks that it was late morning and certainly not earlier than 11am. Mrs Shelmerdine usually had lunch at about noon. Shipman's appointments sheet for that day shows that he had a full list of patients from 8.45am until 10.15am. Then he had seven patients to see in open surgery, scheduled to start at 10.15am. He often ran late and usually did administrative work when the open surgery was finished. It is very unlikely that Shipman could have arrived at Mrs Shelmerdine's as early as 11am and far more likely that he arrived at about noon or later.
Mr Shelmerdine is the managing director of a family business in Nottingham. His wife, Mrs Margaret Shelmerdine, also works in the business. At some time between 2.30pm and 3.30pm, Mrs Shelmerdine received a telephone call from Shipman. He asked to speak to Mr Shelmerdine and said it was very important. When Mrs Shelmerdine explained that Mr Shelmerdine was in a meeting, Shipman said, 'He will want to know this, I have found his mother dead'. Mr Shelmerdine then spoke to Shipman, who told him that his mother had died. Shipman said he had called at the house earlier. He had been very concerned about Mrs Shelmerdine and had advised her that she ought to be in hospital. She had not wanted to go. He had gone to the chemist to obtain medication for her and, on his return, he had found her dead. Mr Shelmerdine thought that it was very strange that his mother should have refused to go to hospital if that is what the doctor had recommended. Shipman did not say that he had suggested to Mrs Shelmerdine that she should telephone her son before finally refusing to go to hospital.
The Inquiry has tried to check the veracity of Shipman's claim that he had been to the chemist to fetch medication for Mrs Shelmerdine. Unfortunately, the Prescription Pricing Authority destroys old prescriptions after 14 months. When the police investigation began in 1998, they obtained and preserved all Shipman's prescriptions then held by the Agency. The earliest is dated May 1997. Accordingly, it has not been possible to confirm or refute Shipman's claim that he obtained a prescription for Mrs Shelmerdine. The medical records, to which I will refer below, suggest that Shipman administered some medication, Lasix, at the time of his first visit.
Mr Shelmerdine told Shipman that he wished to instruct Fowdens as undertakers. Shipman offered to contact them. He did so and gave the undertaker Mrs Shelmerdine's spare key to gain access. Mrs Hough, of the undertakers, recalls finding Mrs Shelmerdine on the sofa. She looked peaceful, as though asleep.
Mr Shelmerdine says that his mother's front door had a Yale lock and a bolt and chain, which she always applied when she was in the house. She would never leave the door unlocked. She kept a spare key on the sideboard. If Shipman was able to gain access to the house on his second visit, he must either have left the door open or have taken the spare key with him. Mr Shelmerdine thinks that his mother might have been willing to let Shipman have the spare key if he said he was going to collect her medication, although he thinks it unlikely. Certainly, Mrs Shelmerdine did not bolt the door or apply the chain when he left. Shipman had possession of the key at some stage because he passed it to the undertakers. It does not appear to me that the security arrangements throw any light on whether Shipman's account is true. If Mrs Shelmerdine really was unwell that day and was having difficulty in moving about, and if Shipman really did offer to fetch her medication, she might well have given him a key to let himself in when he returned, even if that would not have been her usual practice. On the other hand, Shipman could have killed her during his first visit and taken the key, so that he could let himself in later and 'find' the body.
The entry in the computerised medical records relating to the day of death records:
'Left ventricular failure...
refuses hospital 80 lasix iv'
.
I interpret this to mean that Shipman found Mrs Shelmerdine to be suffering from left ventricular failure. He has not recorded any signs or symptoms upon which his diagnosis was based. He implies that he has advised that she should be admitted to hospital and says that she has refused. He says nothing about any attempt to persuade her or to contact a relative who might do so. He says that he administered 80mg of Lasix intravenously. Lasix is a powerful diuretic and would be appropriate medication for left ventricular failure. He implies that this was administered at the time of his visit while Mrs Shelmerdine was alive and says nothing about the need to obtain medication from the pharmacy. There is no record of Shipman's second visit and his discovery of the death. The whole note is quite inadequate as a record of an episode of supposedly serious illness leading to death.
The Aftermath
Mr and Mrs Shelmerdine drove to Hyde the following day. They found washing hanging in the garden, which indicated to Mr Shelmerdine that his mother had washed some clothes on the morning of her death. Mrs Shelmerdine was in the habit of removing her wedding and engagement rings when doing hand washing. Both rings were found in her purse. Two other items of jewellery, both brooches, were noted to be missing.
Certification
Shipman issued the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and certified the causes of death to be left ventricular failure (with an approximate interval of
'12+ hours'
between onset and death) due to congestive heart failure, which he said had been present for nine years prior to death. Carcinoma of the breast was said to be a condition contributing to death but unrelated to the left ventricular failure.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He recorded the time of death as
'1500hrs'
. He said that he had attended Mrs Shelmerdine during her last illness for a period of three hours. He said he had last seen her about two to three hours before her death and had seen the body about 30 minutes after death, when he had performed a complete external examination. He said that the mode of death was collapse of minutes' duration. This must have been intended to be largely a matter of surmise, as he said that no one had been present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered Mrs Shelmerdine's medical records and the cremation certificate. He concluded that both give rise to a high degree of suspicion. As to the medical records, he observed:
'Very scanty record; suspicious comment about patient refusing hospital admission'
.
Conclusion
There are a number of suspicious features surrounding this death.
The first and most obvious is that the death occurred either during or very shortly after a visit by Shipman. On the morning of her death, Mrs Shelmerdine was well enough to do some washing and make and eat a good lunch. She was speaking to her daughter when Shipman arrived. No one saw Mrs Shelmerdine alive or spoke to her after Shipman's visit. From that fact alone, a grave suspicion arises that Shipman killed her during his first visit.
Shipman's diagnosis of left ventricular failure due to congestive heart disease is very much open to question. Dr John Grenville has observed that Shipman was in the habit of diagnosing congestive heart failure even when there was very little by way of signs or symptoms. Dr Grenville has sometimes felt that the diagnosis could not be justified. In this case, there are multiple entries in the records, but no account of the signs or symptoms on which the diagnosis was based. If the medication prescribed is an indication of the severity of the condition, it must be concluded that the congestive heart failure was not severe. If Mrs Shelmerdine was developing increasingly severe congestive heart disease, one would have expected the doctor in Nottingham to have diagnosed it. He did not. There are other good reasons to doubt Shipman's diagnosis of left ventricular failure. First, if Mrs Shelmerdine had had that condition, she would not have been able to do the washing, hang it out, make her lunch and eat it. Miss Shelmerdine would have realised that her mother was ill if she had been suffering from that condition. Finally, she would not have been found sitting peacefully as though asleep. Dr Grenville says that death from left ventricular failure is a distressing process. The patient almost always has lung secretions round the mouth. Mrs Shelmerdine's appearance in death was inconsistent with a death due to left ventricular failure but was entirely typical of that of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection, almost certainly of diamorphine.
Shipman's claim that Mrs Shelmerdine rejected his advice that she should be admitted to hospital is not plausible. Shipman has frequently claimed that patients with life-threatening conditions have refused admission to hospital. Although there is no doubt that some elderly people do refuse admission, Mrs Shelmerdine's family does not believe she would have done. In any event, it seems highly unlikely that she would have refused without discussing the issue with either her son or daughter, both of whom were close to her. I regard this as a very suspicious feature.
On the MCCD, Shipman said that the interval between the onset of left ventricular failure and death was more than 12 hours. That is quite inconsistent with the evidence of what Mrs Shelmerdine was able to do on the morning of her death. In my view, it is almost certainly a lie, told by Shipman in an attempt to give a plausible account of a death from heart failure.
Taking these factors into account, I have been convinced that Shipman must have killed Mrs Shelmerdine. I am satisfied so as to be sure of this.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001