The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Monica Rene Sparkes
Introduction
Mrs Monica Rene Sparkes (known as Rene) died at her home, 15 Rock Gardens, Gee Cross, Hyde on Wednesday, 7th
October 1992. She was either 72 or 73: her family suggest she was born on 12th
December 1919, whereas the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') suggests that she was born one year earlier. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to arteriosclerosis.
In August 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mr John Shaw, a taxi driver who operated a taxi service in Hyde, expressed concern to the police about the deaths of 21 of Shipman's patients including Mrs Sparkes. The police investigated the death and obtained statements from Mr Terence Sparkes and Mrs Jacqueline Sparkes (Mrs Sparkes' son and daughter-in-law), Mrs Avril Sparkes (Mrs Sparkes' daughter-in-law and the wife of Mrs Sparkes' son, Peter), Mrs Dorothy Sparkes and Mrs Phyllis Holt (Mrs Sparkes' sisters-in-law), Mrs Jean Cope (Mrs Sparkes' niece and the daughter of Mrs Dorothy Sparkes), Mr Allan Withers (the manager of the Greater Manchester Paramedic Emergency Control Centre) and Mr Roland Siebert (a fire officer employed at Manchester Airport). The police also obtained a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Sparkes but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mr and Mrs Terence Sparkes and from Mrs Cope. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Sparkes' general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Sparkes was a widow and lived alone. According to her family she enjoyed generally good health, although she had suffered chronic back problems following a road accident some years before her death. After this, her mobility was restricted and she also had problems with her balance, which were thought by the treating doctors to be caused by cervical spondylosis resulting from her accident. She took medication for heart trouble, 'water retention' and depression.
The medical records present a slightly more complex picture. They corroborate the accident and related problems but cast some doubt on the cardiac history. In 1987, Shipman diagnosed congestive heart failure because Mrs Sparkes had swollen legs and was breathless. After that, Mrs Sparkes always took medication for that condition, despite the fact that in 1987 Dr M H Husaini, consultant physician at Tameside General Hospital, did not think she had congestive heart failure. He thought the swelling of her legs was due to her varicose veins and that her breathlessness was due to asthma or anxiety. Dr Hussaini found no sign of congestive heart failure either on clinical examination or on electrocardiogram (ECG).
Mr Sparkes told the Inquiry that, in the weeks leading up to her death, his mother did not mention any problems with her health. He told the police that his mother recovered from her dizzy spells. His wife recalls that her mother-in-law was 'bad on her feet' when she last saw her, on 27th
September 1992. Mrs Avril Sparkes formed the same impression from conversations with Mrs Sparkes in the week or so before she died. Indeed, she contacted Shipman on account of such problems.
The surgery records confirm these difficulties. For Monday, 21st
September 1992, the practice visits book says:
'Rene Sparkes...
keeps falling
feet swollen
can't get down'
.
The handwritten medical records for that day contain the following entry:
'Vertigo
increase Stemetil to
QDS from TDS
(
illegible
)
Trace oedema'
.
For Wednesday, 30th
September 1992, the following entry appears in the practice visits book:
'...Rene Sparkes...
fallen again
(relative rang)'
.
There is no entry in the medical records for 30th
September 1992 but Shipman's personal visits book mentions Mrs Sparkes' name and address, confirming that a visit was made or, at least, intended.
Mr Sparkes visited his mother on Tuesday, 6th
October, the day before she died. He recalls that she had a cold but otherwise 'seemed absolutely fine' and was busy ironing her clothes and packing her case for a forthcoming holiday in the Lake District. It appears that Mr Sparkes was the last person to see Mrs Sparkes alive, apart from Shipman. Mr Sparkes recalls that his mother said that Shipman was due to visit the following day at 10am. I am doubtful whether that could be right as it would be most unusual for Shipman to make a home visit as early as 10am, save in an emergency.
The Day of the Death
The practice visits book for Wednesday, 7th
October 1992 contains the following entry:
'Rene Sparkes
Keeps Falling
'
.
That suggests that Shipman's visit on 7th
October was precipitated by a request made that morning and that there was not a pre-arranged appointment for a visit.
According to the appointments book, Shipman saw 15 patients in open surgery scheduled to begin at 10.15am. Shipman would have been unlikely to finish before 11am and it might well have been much later than that before he was free to go out on his rounds. In any event, it appears that Shipman did not visit until about lunchtime.
Shortly after lunchtime on 7th
October, Mrs Holt telephoned Mrs Sparkes. A man answered the telephone and introduced himself as Dr Shipman. He said that Mrs Sparkes had suffered a slight stroke. Shipman also said that he had telephoned to request the attendance of an ambulance but there had been an incident at Manchester Airport and it would not be possible to send an ambulance to Mrs Sparkes. Shipman added that he had to go back to his surgery to see other patients and said that he had told Mrs Sparkes to lie on her bed until he returned. Before Mrs Holt could ask whether she could help, Shipman put the telephone down.
After she had spoken to Shipman, Mrs Holt telephoned her sister-in-law, Mrs Dorothy Sparkes, and gave her the news. Mrs Dorothy Sparkes telephoned her daughter, Mrs Cope, who remembers receiving this call at about 1pm. Mrs Cope told her mother that she would telephone her aunt to find out what was happening. Mrs Cope immediately telephoned Mrs Sparkes but there was no reply. She assumed that Shipman had taken her to hospital. In her statement to the Inquiry, Mrs Cope states:
'I wasn't sure what to do as I didn't know which hospital Rene had been taken to. I phoned Jackie and Terry, Rene's son and daughter-in-law's house and got no answer...
'Before I had time to do anything else, I received another telephone call from my mother and she was crying. She said that Shipman had phoned her and said that Rene had died. He said he had other patients to go and see and he had simply gone out and when he had come back he had found Rene dead'
.
The timing of the telephone call from Mrs Dorothy Sparkes to Mrs Cope is not clear. However, Mrs Cope suggests it was quite soon after 1pm. According to Mrs Dorothy Sparkes, it was not until 4pm that Shipman informed her that her mother had died. Mrs Jacqueline Sparkes thinks that it was at about 3pm that Mrs Cope told her of the death. Mr Sparkes was at work in Cheadle and believes that he received the news some time between 2pm and 3pm.
Mr and Mrs Terence Sparkes drove to Mrs Sparkes' house. Shipman was not there when they arrived. Mr Sparkes entered the bedroom and found his mother's body fully clothed and lying on top of her bed. Her eyes were closed and she looked 'very tidy'. He does not remember whether her sleeves were rolled up. Her cat was sleeping on the bed next to her.
The handwritten general practitioner records contain the following entry for 7th
October 1992:
'
CVA. mild
TGH
Amb arranged
'
.
This note suggests that Shipman suspected that Mrs Sparkes had suffered a mild left-sided cerebrovascular accident and had arranged for her to be admitted to hospital. There is a second note within the handwritten records, timed at 3.30pm, which states that Mrs Sparkes had died and that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to arteriosclerosis and congestive heart failure. The time stated within the note throws some light on the probable timing of Shipman's telephone call to Mrs Dorothy Sparkes. It was probably at about 3.30pm.
It would appear that Shipman visited for the first time at about lunchtime and then returned at about 3.30pm, when he discovered that Mrs Sparkes had died.
Certification
Mr Sparkes attended Shipman's surgery the following day and collected the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), on which Shipman had certified that the cerebrovascular accident had been caused by arteriosclerosis and that congestive heart failure had contributed to the death. Mr Sparkes saw Shipman, who shrugged and said something like, 'These things happen'.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He wrote that death had occurred at 14.30 on 7th
October 1992, although initially he appears to have written 12.30. He said that he had attended Mrs Sparkes for one hour during her last illness. He said that he last saw her alive within one hour of her death. He said that he saw and carried out an external examination of Mrs Sparkes' body within one hour after the death. The cause of death was as certified on the MCCD and the mode of death was said to be collapse lasting only minutes. Since Shipman was not present at the death, this can only have been supposition on his part, though he said that his opinion as to the mode and cause of death was based on his own observations. He said that no one was present at the moment of death.
Following the death, Mr Sparkes was surprised to find that there was only a few pence in the house. He found this unusual because he would have expected his mother to have more money in the house since she was due to go on holiday. The family also refers to an overnight bag, which was missing.
The Ambulance
According to Mr Withers, in the event of an emergency at Manchester Airport, six emergency ambulances would be sent to the airport but these would be sent from Stockport, Trafford and South Manchester and not normally from further afield. If a doctor such as Shipman had requested an ambulance, arrangements would in any event be made to ensure that the patient was taken to hospital. A request would never be refused. The ambulance records for 1992 have been destroyed. According to Mr Siebert, there was an incident at the airport that day. His department was notified of it at 1.29pm and was stood down at 2.21pm. It seems likely that some local ambulances did attend the incident.
Having heard Shipman's account at the time, Mrs Avril Sparkes was concerned and telephoned the ambulance service to find out why an ambulance had not attended. Enquiries were made and she was told that no request had ever been made. She says that soon after the death she contacted the surgery, seeking an explanation. She was very upset and the receptionists would not allow her to see Shipman. She did not pursue her concerns thereafter. It is likely that Shipman did contact the ambulance service, that he was told of the incident at the airport and that he told the ambulance service that no ambulance was, in the circumstances, necessary. I am sure that he did not make a request that was refused.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville told the police that there is no evidence in Mrs Sparkes' recorded medical history to suggest that she suffered from arteriosclerosis. Although her blood pressure was measured on several occasions, it was never elevated. In Dr Grenville's opinion, there is nothing within the medical records to suggest that Mrs Sparkes was at increased risk of stroke.
In Dr Grenville's view, Shipman's note of his attendance on the day of death was entirely inadequate because it did not record any evidence on which he could have based his diagnosis of a stroke.
Dr Grenville told the police that it is possible, although statistically highly unlikely, that Mrs Sparkes developed a stroke just prior to Shipman's arrival and that she subsequently died of it. Dr Grenville said that, if Mrs Sparkes was having an evolving stroke and was lying on the bed because of it, it is possible that she lapsed into unconsciousness and died in that position. Dr Grenville told the police that, in such circumstances, the position in which she was found was not inconsistent with a diagnosis of stroke.
According to Dr Grenville, the diagnosis of congestive heart failure appears to have been made on the basis of swollen legs and intermittent shortness of breath. Dr Husaini's letter indicates that he was not convinced that Mrs Sparkes was suffering from cardiac failure. After examining a large number of medical records kept by Shipman, Dr Grenville is of the opinion that Shipman often diagnosed congestive heart failure on inadequate evidence.
Conclusion
There are several highly suspicious circumstances surrounding this death. First and most obvious, Shipman was the last person to see Mrs Sparkes alive. He also discovered her dead body. There was no reply to a telephone call soon after he had spoken to Mrs Holt, at which time he was still at Mrs Sparkes' house. This telephone call was made at a time when, if Shipman is to be believed, Mrs Sparkes had recently lain down on her bed to rest. There is a close temporal association between Shipman's presence at the house and Mrs Sparkes' failure to answer Mrs Cope's telephone call. This suggests that Mrs Sparkes was probably dead when Shipman left the house.
Shipman's claim that Mrs Sparkes died as the result of a stroke seems quite improbable. As Dr Grenville said, she did not suffer from high blood pressure. She had called Shipman out that morning in connection with the latest in a series of falls, which had always, in the past, been attributed to vertigo resulting from her accident. It is therefore extremely unlikely that Mrs Sparkes should have developed a stroke in the interval between telephoning Shipman and his arrival. There is no evidence in the medical records of any examination upon which Shipman could properly have based his diagnosis of stroke.
This case has Shipman's hallmark on it. I have come across many cases in which he has returned to the home of a victim later in the day and has pretended to discover the dead body. It is in other respects typical of cases in which Shipman killed his patient.
My conclusion is that Shipman killed Mrs Sparkes, almost certainly by injecting her with a lethal dose of opiate. Although there is a theoretical possibility that she could have suffered a sudden fatal stroke or heart attack in the short period between Shipman's departure and return, I think this possibility can be safely discounted. It would be too great a coincidence. I am able to say that I am sure that this was an unlawful killing.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001