The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Alice Smith
Introduction
Mrs Alice Smith died at her home, 39 Tower Street, Hyde on Wednesday, 11th
August 1982 at the age of 74. She was a widow and lived alone. She was registered as a patient of Shipman. Following a post-mortem examination without inquest, the Coroner for South Manchester certified that the cause of her death was congestive heart failure, due to ischaemic heart disease. Mrs Smith was buried.
Early in 2001, a relative of Mrs Smith contacted the police to say that she was aware that Mrs Smith had died suddenly at her home. The police investigated the death, although they took no witness statements.
The Inquiry has taken witness statements from Mrs Doreen Williams (Mrs Smith's niece), Mr John Hopwood (her nephew), Mrs Anthea Douglas (her sister-in-law who lived in the same street) and Mr William Hodkinson and his wife, Mrs Joan Hodkinson (friends and neighbours). Mrs Douglas and Mr and Mrs Hodkinson gave oral evidence at a hearing on 8th
November 2001. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Professor Helen Whitwell, consultant pathologist, and she gave oral evidence on 7th
December 2001.
The Inquiry has had access to the coroner's documents, Shipman's own visits book and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book. The medical records have not survived.
Personal Background
The witnesses say that, although Mrs Smith had not always enjoyed good health, she was reasonably well shortly before her death and was living an active and sociable life. She was much involved in church activities and with the Townswomen's Guild. She had pernicious anaemia, but her monthly injections for this apparently made her feel much better. Mr Hopwood recalls that Mrs Smith had intermittent digestive troubles for which she took Gaviscon. The witnesses were also aware that Mrs Smith had a history of bladder problems requiring surgery, many years before her death, from which the only legacy seems to have been a retained suture, and for which she was followed up at the hospital, perhaps once a year. She had undergone a mastectomy following a diagnosis of breast cancer many years before her death. Although these were serious illnesses, it does not appear that any of them could have contributed to her death. None of the witnesses thought that Mrs Smith suffered from any form of heart trouble. Nor do they remember that she suffered from swollen ankles. However, Professor Helen Whitwell said that it is possible that the discomfort that Mrs Smith attributed to indigestion could have been atypical angina.
Mrs Hodkinson saw Mrs Smith on the day before she died and remembers that she seemed perfectly well.
The Day of the Death
On Wednesday, 11th
August 1982, probably just before 9am, Mrs Smith telephoned Mrs Douglas (then Mrs Anthea Hopwood) and said that she was feeling off-colour. Mrs Douglas and her then husband, Mr Allen Hopwood (Mrs Smith's brother), called on her and found her up and dressed and not apparently unwell. Mrs Douglas thinks that Mrs Smith probably had indigestion or stomach ache, which she attributed to Mrs Smith's weakness for rather rich food. Mrs Douglas and her husband stayed at the house for about 10 to 20 minutes. Mrs Douglas does not recall that Mrs Smith said she had called the doctor. However, it seems that she must have done, as her name appears in Shipman's visits book for that day. The entry has a number 1 by it, which seems to show that Shipman planned that this would be his first visit of the day. The name is crossed out, which seems to indicate that the visit did in fact take place.
Towards evening, Mrs Douglas went back to Mrs Smith's house to see how she was. There was no reply to her knock, nor was there any response when she shouted through the letterbox. Mrs Douglas went to the Hodkinsons' house as she knew that they had a key to Mrs Smith's house. Mr and Mrs Hodkinson and Mrs Douglas went to Mrs Smith's house and let themselves in. When Mrs Douglas made her witness statement to the Inquiry, she said that she went back to Mrs Smith's house at about 1pm and, on getting no reply, went to find Mr and Mrs Hodkinson. When shown some contemporaneous police documents, which showed that Mrs Smith's body had been found just after 6pm, she said that she must have been mistaken about the time at which she returned to the house to find Mrs Smith dead. I am satisfied that she was mistaken and that she returned to Mrs Smith's house shortly before 6pm and that the body was found just after 6pm. Whether Mrs Douglas had visited Mrs Smith in between her early morning and her evening visits is a question to which I will come in due course.
Mr and Mrs Hodkinson say that they found Mrs Smith slumped on the floor at the foot of the stairs. Due to the position of her body, it was not possible fully to open the kitchen door. She appeared to be dead. Mrs Douglas thinks that Mrs Smith was sitting on the sofa. However, Mrs Douglas accepts that she was very shocked and upset at the discovery of Mrs Smith's death and admits that the events of that evening were a blur. I am satisfied that Mr and Mrs Hodkinson are right in their recollection of the position of the body.
Mr Hodkinson called the police. He did not call the doctor because he did not know who Mrs Smith's doctor was. He did, however, wait with the police officers, whom he knew, until a doctor arrived. He does not know who that doctor was. It was probably Dr Bills who was the Donneybrook doctor on duty that evening. It appears from the documents that Mrs Smith was certified dead at 8.30pm.
The Aftermath
The police reported the death to the coroner and provided a Form 751 Report of Sudden Death and a Form 751A Medical History in a Case of Sudden Death. On Form 751, it is said that Mrs Smith had been found dead at 6.05pm and that her death had occurred some time after 1pm. On Form 751A, it is said that Anthea Hopwood (now Anthea Douglas) was the person who had last seen Mrs Smith alive at 1pm. On Form 751, it is said that Shipman had visited Mrs Smith at noon. If both of those statements were accurate, then it would seem very unlikely that Shipman killed Mrs Smith.
Mrs Douglas was at that time married to Mr Allen Hopwood, Mrs Smith's brother. Mrs Douglas says that she has no recollection of seeing Mrs Smith alive at any time after her early morning visit and she has no recollection at all of supplying any information to the police. Her recollection is that she left Mrs Smith's house when the police arrived. However, Mrs Douglas' recollection of the events of this day has been found to be imperfect. This is perhaps not surprising as it is all a long time ago and she was very upset about the death. Mr Allen Hopwood appears to have gone to his sister's house and he certainly spoke to the police. On Form 751, it is recorded that he identified his sister's body. It seems quite possible that Mr Allen Hopwood told the police when his wife had last seen Mrs Smith alive. This cannot be checked as Mr Allen Hopwood has since died.
Shipman's claim that he visited at noon cannot be taken at face value. He could have visited at that time, but he might well have visited much later. I note that the visit to Mrs Smith is marked in the visits book so as to suggest that it would be the first of the day. However, if Shipman knew at what time it was being said that Mrs Smith had last been seen alive, it would be quite typical of him to say that he had been there at some earlier time.
On Form 751A, the medical history given includes reference to pernicious anaemia and two prescribed drugs, Aludrox, an antacid, and Imedin, which does not appear in the British National Formulary and which Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry, has never heard of.
The police Report to the Coroner refers to cancers of the bladder and breast many years earlier. It continues:
'Complained of severe indigestion early this year.
Seen by GP during past week but
(
deleted word
)
he
did not expect her to die. She had complained
of chest pain, recurrence of indigestion symptoms'
.
The coroner ordered a post-mortem examination. The pathologist noted oedema round both feet. Internally he found congestion and oedema in the lungs. The report on the heart says:
'The heart weighed 350gms. The coronary vessels showed
moderate to severe grades of atheromatous changes. The
aorta showed moderate grades of atheromatous changes'
.
The liver is also said to be congested, and the spleen and kidneys slightly congested.
The opinion of the pathologist, Dr Day, was that Mrs Smith's death was due to natural causes, namely congestive cardiac failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Whitwell said that it would not be possible, from the information reported at the post-mortem examination, to form any reliable view as to the time of death.
She observed that the findings were consistent with ischaemic heart disease, with coronary artery atheroma. These were long-standing conditions, which were capable of causing death. It was possible that Mrs Smith's 'indigestion' was in fact atypical angina. There were no positive observable features, such as an infarct, to show that the death had been caused by the ischaemic heart disease. The description of the narrowing of the vessels was vague and it was not possible to draw any firm conclusions.
Professor Whitwell also observed that congestive cardiac failure is more properly described as a mode of death rather than a cause of death. In any event, she explained that this condition develops over a period of time (usually days but certainly some hours) and does not occur suddenly. Professor Whitwell noted that Mrs Smith had been active until shortly before her death and that the witnesses had not noticed any swelling in her ankles.
Her conclusion was that it was not possible to say, from the post-mortem evidence, what the cause of death had been. The death might have been natural and have been caused by acute heart failure or arrhythmia, both of which would have been due to ischaemic heart disease. On the other hand, the death could have been due to a lethal dose of opiate, which would leave no obvious signs at post-mortem examination.
Conclusion
There are some causes for suspicion in this case. The most obvious is that the death was discovered quite shortly after Shipman had visited Mrs Smith. If it could be said with confidence that no one had spoken to Mrs Smith or seen her alive after that visit, I would say that Shipman had probably killed her, unless there was some other evidence which pointed against that conclusion. Here, there is some evidence that Mrs Douglas saw Mrs Smith at about 1pm. She has no recollection of that. Shipman's claim that he visited at noon should be treated with circumspection, as he quite often gave false information about his movements in order to distance himself from a death. Here, there is no firm basis on which I could say that Shipman must have been lying about the time of his visit and no clear basis on which I could say that I am satisfied that Mrs Douglas did not see Mrs Smith at 1pm.
The medical evidence is neutral. Mrs Smith had sufficient ischaemic heart disease to account for a cardiac death, but there was no clear sign that her death had in fact been caused by a heart condition. It could quite well have been caused by a lethal injection.
Mrs Smith's position in death, collapsed on the floor, is not typical of the usual appearance of Shipman's victims, most of whom were found sitting on a chair or sofa or lying on a bed. Such positions would not be typical of a sudden cardiac death. On the other hand, Mrs Smith's position is quite consistent with a sudden cardiac death. This factor is not conclusive. A number of patients that I am satisfied Shipman killed have been found on the floor.
In general, when Shipman had killed a patient, he usually managed to avoid a referral to the coroner. He did this by ensuring that he would be called to the death when it was discovered. In this case, the death was not discovered until just after 6pm and he was not on duty that evening. The police were called and the case was referred to the coroner before Shipman was able to take control of matters. I have come across very few cases in which Shipman has killed a patient where he allowed events to go beyond his control. He would often make a return visit to the deceased's house to 'discover' the body himself. He would then 'find' the body, inform the relatives and give an assurance that he would be able to certify the cause of death and that a post-mortem examination would not be necessary. In such cases, the police and paramedics were not usually called. Even if they were, they would see no obvious sign of foul play and they would be under no obligation to take further action. Mrs Smith's death is not typical of cases in which Shipman killed in that he made no attempt to prevent a referral to the coroner. However, these were early days in Shipman's career as a murderer and it is quite possible that he had not yet perfected his technique of retaining control.
It is possible that Shipman was the last person to see Mrs Smith alive and it is also possible that he killed her. But there is nothing that points clearly to that conclusion. The medical evidence is neutral. Mrs Smith's position in death points more to a natural death than to a killing. The general circumstances are not typical of cases in which Shipman killed, in that the sudden death was handled by the police and referred to the coroner. Although I cannot state this conclusion with any great confidence, I think it is likely that Mrs Smith died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001