The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Cicely Sharples
Introduction
Mrs Cicely Sharples died at her home, 11 Swindells Street, Newton, Hyde on Wednesday, 15th
June 1994 at the age of 87. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to cerebroarteriosclerosis.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the available medical records and the information contained in the cremation certificate, the death of Mrs Sharples was highly suspicious. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Sharples' cousin, Mr John Ashworth.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Sharples but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Ashworth and Mrs Shirley Pleva, Mrs Sharples' home help, and has had access to Mrs Sharples' general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Sharples lived alone in her terraced house. She slept downstairs in the front room. She suffered from shingles in 1983, which was followed by neuralgia, which remained for the rest of her life. Her husband died in 1993. Not long before his death, she had suffered a stroke, from which she made a reasonable recovery, although she had some residual weakness on the right side, which affected her mobility. She used a Zimmer frame to move about the house. She could not go out alone. In other respects, she was in reasonable health. She was able to cook for herself. Her home help visited every day and Mr Ashworth called in three or four times a week. Shipman used to visit Mrs Sharples about twice a month.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
Mrs Sharples' handwritten medical records contain the following entry, apparently for 7th
June:
'7/6/94 V
(
visit
)
: oedema JVP
basal creps
early CHF Innovace 5mg TOD
Blood for U & E'
.
This entry suggests that Shipman visited Mrs Sharples and found that she had oedema (probably swelling of the lower legs) and raised jugular venous pressure. He made a diagnosis of early congestive heart failure and prescribed Innovace. He also took blood samples to test for urea and electrolytes. There is no record of a visit on 7th
June in the visits book or in the computerised records and it seems likely that this visit was, in fact, on 8th
June. The visits book for that day records a visit request because of
'very swollen feet'
and the computerised records contain the following entry:
'Seen in own home ...
Oedema - symptom ankles jvp up creps Innovace5'
.
This is the first indication that Mrs Sharples suffered congestive heart failure, a condition which, according to Dr Grenville, was often diagnosed by Shipman on the basis of very slender evidence.
The next entry in the visits book for Mrs Sharples refers to a
'Re-vis
(
it
)
'
on 15th
June, presumably as a follow-up to the visit of 8th
June.
Mr Ashworth visited Mrs Sharples on Friday, 10th
June and she seemed well.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Pleva visited Mrs Sharples at about 9am on Wednesday, 15th
June 1994. She appeared to be her 'normal self' and said that Shipman was coming to see her at 2pm. Mrs Sharples said that she did not know why Shipman was coming and she made no complaint of ill health.
Mr Ashworth visited Mrs Sharples at about 10am. He stayed until some time between noon and 1pm. He has a vague recollection of opening a can of food for Mrs Sharples' lunch but has told the Inquiry that he did not eat with her on that day. She was her 'normal self' and made no complaint about her health. She did not mention that she was expecting a visit from Shipman later that day. Mrs Pleva remembers that, after the death, the woman who delivered Mrs Sharples' meals on wheels informed her that she had delivered Mrs Sharples' lunch and left her eating it.
Mrs Pleva returned to see Mrs Sharples at about 5pm. Behind the front door, which Mrs Sharples would always keep locked, was a small porch, the door of which opened into the front room. On returning to the house that afternoon, Mrs Pleva found both the front and porch doors open. She was immediately concerned and thought someone might have broken into the house. She went in and called out for Mrs Sharples. Mrs Sharples was not in the front room, although her walking frame was in front of the fire. Mrs Pleva found this strange because Mrs Sharples could not walk without her frame. Mrs Pleva went into the kitchen where she saw Mrs Sharples lying on the floor immediately in front of a little stool on which she used to sit to eat her lunch. It appeared to Mrs Pleva that Mrs Sharples had fallen off her stool. She dialled 999 and requested an ambulance. She noticed that Mrs Sharples' skin was a sort of 'grey/bluey' colour. Mrs Pleva looked around the kitchen for signs that Mrs Sharples might have been eating her lunch when she fell. There were, however, no plates or trays out in the kitchen.
Within a short space of time, an ambulance arrived. The ambulance records have not survived. Mrs Pleva told the crew that she believed that Mrs Sharples' doctor had been to see her that afternoon. At the request of the ambulance men, Mrs Pleva telephoned the surgery and asked for Shipman to attend. He arrived about ten minutes later and the ambulance crew left soon afterwards. Mrs Pleva does not recall Shipman examining Mrs Sharples.
The Lloyd George medical records contain the following entry for 15th
June 1984:
'15 6 94 V
(
visit
)
Stable oedema just
HS I II OK lungs OK 130/50
continue at 10mg OD see
4/52'
.
This note suggests that Shipman visited Mrs Sharples that afternoon and formed the view that she was in reasonably good cardiac and respiratory health. He planned to review her in four weeks' time and did not prescribe any change in her medication.
There is then a second entry, on a separate card, for the same day. It reads as follows:
'15 6 94
Very sick OK now.
c/o
headaches still.
tablets OK at moment.
Becoming very stiff immobile - chat
re admission
long
term with EPH
Admits not fit to live at home but
no
insight wishes to stay at home.
To think about it again
1700 hours
certified death
1)
2)
CVA
CHF'
.
What is most striking about these entries is the fact that there is no explanation or obvious reason why Shipman visited twice (or at least made two entirely separate entries) on the same day, before returning to the house (apparently for the third time) to certify the fact and cause of death. The initials
'EPH'
denote 'elderly persons' home'.
The appointments sheets show that Shipman had a very busy morning at the surgery on Wednesday, 15th
June and he could not possibly have been free to start his visits until after midday. He had three visits to make that day, of which Mrs Sharples was one. He had a vaccinations clinic at 2pm and would have been free to resume his visits by 2.30pm. He was not then required in the surgery until 4pm for afternoon surgery.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). The certificate itself has not survived but the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman said that he had last seen Mrs Sharples alive on 15th
June 1994. He said that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident, which was due to cerebroarteriosclerosis. Congestive heart failure had contributed to the death. He said that he had seen the body after death and there would be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He stated that death had occurred at
'1640 hrs'
on 15th
June 1994. Mrs Pleva does not think that this can be correct because she discovered the death at 5pm and, in her opinion, Mrs Sharples must have been dead for longer than 20 minutes because the body had turned a 'funny colour'. Shipman initially recorded that he last saw Mrs Sharples alive six hours before her death, although it appears that he altered this to four hours, which would, on his timings, mean that he had visited at about 12.40pm. This is inconsistent with what Mrs Sharples told Mrs Pleva, namely that Shipman was due at 2pm. However, it is quite possible that Shipman might have given Mrs Sharples only an approximate idea of the time he would visit. Shipman stated that he saw the body about ten minutes after death and claimed that he had made a complete external examination of it. The cause of death was stated as on the MCCD counterfoil. Shipman stated that the mode of death was collapse lasting minutes. He said that his views as to the cause and mode of death were based on statements made by a neighbour and the ambulance men. It is possible that Shipman assumed that Mrs Pleva was a neighbour. It would appear that Mrs Sharples was already dead when Mrs Pleva found her, and the ambulance men arrived only shortly before Shipman himself. It is hard to imagine what useful information they could have given him. It would appear that his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were either based on surmise or else were fabricated. Shipman also claimed that the ambulance men were present at the moment of death, which was a blatant lie.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Baker thought the death highly suspicious on the basis both of the contents of the medical records and the information contained in the cremation documentation.
In Dr Grenville's opinion, there was nothing in Mrs Sharples' medical records to lead Shipman to make a diagnosis of stroke as the cause of her death. He says that her position and appearance in death, collapsed on the floor, could be consistent with sudden death from natural causes, such as heart attack, stroke, pulmonary embolus or a ruptured aortic aneurysm. However, they could also be consistent with her having been given an injection of a lethal dose of a strong opiate whilst sitting at the kitchen table. In Dr Grenville's view it is not possible to determine the cause of Mrs Sharples' death from the medical evidence. However, he says that Shipman was not justified in certifying the cause of death as cerebrovascular accident.
Conclusion
There are a number of very suspicious circumstances surrounding this death.
First, Mrs Sharples was found dead quite soon after a visit from Shipman. The evidence suggests that, apart from Shipman, the last people to see Mrs Sharples alive on the day of her death were Mr Ashworth and the meals on wheels lady. No one appears to have seen or spoken to Mrs Sharples after Shipman's visit. The temporal association between Shipman's visit and the death gives rise to suspicion. My suspicion is increased because there does not seem to have been any indication that Mrs Sharples was in any way unwell that day. When Mr Ashworth saw her she was well. It is reported that, when the meals on wheels lady left, Mrs Sharples was eating her lunch. She appears to have finished it and tidied the kitchen. Shipman's visit was not at Mrs Sharples' request; it was a revisit, which he chose to make. Of course, elderly people can and do sometimes die suddenly without previous signs of serious illness. Mrs Sharples had had one stroke and she must have been at some risk of suffering another. Nonetheless, it would be something of a coincidence if she had a fatal stroke soon after Shipman's visit. I regard the circumstances as very suspicious.
I suspect that Shipman's medical notes are not genuine. The first one indicates that the signs of congestive heart failure that Shipman had noted a week earlier were settling. He found nothing to concern him and decided to visit Mrs Sharples in four weeks' time. That note seems to be complete in itself. The second note presents a very different picture. Mrs Sharples is said to have been very sick. She was complaining that she still had a headache. Neither of those complaints appeared in the previous note and the people who had seen her that day were unaware of sickness or headache. There is a discussion about the need for Mrs Sharples to go into residential care. If Shipman made a visit and found Mrs Sharples in good health, as he claimed in his first note, I cannot imagine why he would then have returned. His second note is quite inconsistent with the first. Then he has made a third note recording the death. I suspect that Shipman made the first note during or just after a visit in the early afternoon. I think he killed Mrs Sharples during that visit but made a note to suggest that she was well when he left her. I do not think he then returned while she was still alive. I suspect that he made the second note at some later time with the intention of providing some support for his diagnosis for the cause of death. It may well be that he had forgotten that he had already made one entry relating to that visit. The two were on separate cards.
As Dr Grenville says, if this were a natural death which had occurred while Mrs Sharples was alone, Shipman could not possibly have known the cause of her death. He ought to have referred the case to the coroner. That he did not gives rise to some suspicion.
There are a number of entries on Form B which increase my suspicion. First, Shipman claimed that he knew the time of death. He did not and there is no way in which he could properly have assessed it. I have found many cases in which Shipman has killed a patient in which he has pretended to know the time of death. He has stated a time considerably after his own visit. His motive must have been to distance his visit from the death. I think he has done that in this case.
Second, he sought to create the impression that the ambulance crew were present at the death and had been in a position to give him information from which he was able to diagnose the cause of death and describe the mode of death. Shipman often did this when he wanted to give the impression that he could not have been the last person to see the patient alive and to suggest that his diagnosis of the cause of death was based on information supplied by responsible people.
Although the position in which Mrs Sharples was found could be consistent with a sudden death from natural causes, the other attendant circumstances render it far more likely that her position in death resulted from her having been injected with a fatal dose of a strong opiate whilst sitting at the kitchen table.
I have come to the conclusion that Shipman killed Mrs Sharples. I think he probably found her in the front room and for some reason helped her to walk through to the kitchen, leaving her walking frame behind. Otherwise, I do not see how she came to be in the kitchen without her frame. I think he then told her either that he wanted to take a blood sample or to give her an injection. While she was sitting on her stool, I think he gave her a lethal injection of opiate. I think she fell to the floor as she became unconscious. I feel able to say that I am sure of this conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001