The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The First Report
>
Alphabetical List of Cases
>
Arthur Henderson Stopford
Introduction
Mr Arthur Henderson Stopford died at his home, 17 Rydal Avenue, Hyde on Tuesday, 29th
August 1995 at the age of 82. He had been a patient of Shipman since 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Mr Stopford thought highly of Shipman, who certified that the cause of his death was old age.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of information contained in the cremation certificate and medical records, the death of Mr Stopford was highly suspicious. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Grace Ann Eades (Mr Stopford's daughter), Miss Barbara Ann Eades (his granddaughter) and Mr John Riley (a paramedic).The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Stopford but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mrs Eades, Miss Eades and Mr Riley and has had access to Mr Stopford's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Stopford was registered blind and was partially deaf. His legs were weak and, as a consequence, he could not walk very far. He had a wheelchair and would only leave his flat when accompanied by a member of his family. He could get up and dress himself without help. According to his family, he was not suffering from any serious illnesses.
Dr Grenville has reviewed Mr Stopford's medical notes and records. They reveal that Mr Stopford had osteoarthritis in both knees for which he took anti-inflammatory medication. In October 1980, he was seen by Shipman following a sudden loss of consciousness. There had been no such previous attacks. Examination was normal and Shipman recorded a full recovery. He entered a diagnosis of transient cerebral ischaemia.
The computerised general practitioner records contain an entry dated 31st
May 1995, describing a
'Drop attack'
. Examination showed blood pressure of 130/80 and a pulse of 80 beats per minute. Shipman prescribed 75mg aspirin per day. As Dr Grenville observed, it appears from this note that Shipman visited Mr Stopford following an episode in which he dropped to the floor, with or without loss of consciousness. Examination was normal. From the prescription, it appears that Shipman considered that this was a transient ischaemic attack (TIA). There was no follow-up save that, on 5th June 1995, Mr Stopford was said to be suffering from
'Malaise'
, which Shipman seems to have thought would resolve with time. That was the last entry until 27th
August, two days before the death.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
On Saturday, 26th
August 1995, Mr Stopford telephoned his daughter to say that he was ill with diarrhoea. Mrs Eades said that she would telephone to ask the doctor to visit. After telephoning Shipman's surgery, she went to her father's flat and Shipman arrived whilst she was still there. He took her to one side and explained that he thought Mr Stopford might have 'started with cancer'. He said that he would visit on the following Tuesday and take a sample of blood. He also asked Mrs Eades to take a sample of her father's stool to the surgery. The following entry, dated 27th
August 1995, appears in the Lloyd George cards, although it is likely that this is a mistaken reference to Shipman's visit on 26th
August:
'V
(
visit
)
diarrhoea for 4/7 wt
pale
(
abdomen
)
soft no pain
Diarrhoea no blood no melaena
urine ok
Immodium
(
sic
)
stool
MSU
for bloods'
.
This entry suggests that Mr Stopford told Shipman that he had had diarrhoea for four days and had lost weight. He was looking pale. The abdomen was soft and there was no pain. There was no blood, either fresh or altered, in the diarrhoea and there were no urinary symptoms. Shipman prescribed Imodium and arranged for samples of stool and urine to be sent for examination. He noted that a blood test would be required.
Mrs Eades last spoke to her father when she telephoned him on the evening of Monday, 28th
August 1995. He said that he was not feeling 'too bad' but said that he still had diarrhoea.
The Day of the Death
On 29th
August 1995, at about 4pm, Mrs Eades and her daughter returned home. Mrs Eades telephoned her father but there was no reply. She asked her daughter to go to check on Mr Stopford.
Miss Eades arrived at her grandfather's flat at about 4.10pm and unlocked the door with her Yale-type key. In the front room she found her grandfather sitting in his usual chair. He looked so peaceful that Miss Eades thought he was sleeping. His head was to one side and was resting on his hands. He was wearing his usual day clothes and a pair of slippers. There was a cup of coffee by his side which, according to Miss Eades' police statement, was still warm. She noticed that her grandfather's lips were blue and then realised that he had died. Miss Eades, who is qualified in first aid, telephoned her mother and then laid her grandfather on the floor and began cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). This had no effect.
Within a short time, Mrs Eades and paramedics, Mr Riley and Mr Humphries, arrived. The ambulance log reveals that the ambulance attended at 4.28pm in response to a call made at 4.19pm. Mr Riley recalls that he found Mr Stopford seated in a chair but he must be wrong, given that Miss Eades had attempted CPR. Shipman arrived soon afterwards and was 'very jolly'. He told Mr Riley that he had seen Mr Stopford a couple of days previously and said that his death was not a surprise. He also said that he had seen Mr Stopford earlier that day, causing Mr Riley to note, 'seen by GP this p.m.' on the patient report form. He then showed Mr Riley Mr Stopford's Lloyd George cards and Mr Riley recalls seeing that Shipman had written:
'??dying'
.
Mrs Eades recalls Shipman saying to her, 'I'm sorry, I'm not supposed to do this'. He then showed her the last entry in her father's Lloyd George cards. She, too, remembers seeing the word 'dying' followed by some question marks. Shipman explained that he had called to see her father at about 2.30pm that day and said that Mr Stopford had just made himself a cup of coffee. At that stage, Shipman walked over to the cup by Mr Stopford's side and commented that Mr Stopford had not touched it. Shipman said that he had taken a sample of blood from Mr Stopford.
Shipman was at the flat for about ten minutes. Before he left, he asked Mrs Eades whether she wanted there to be a post-mortem examination of her father's body. Mrs Eades had previously told Shipman that she thought post-mortem examinations were unnecessary and now said that she would not want one for her father.
The visits book for 29th
August 1995 contains an entry in Shipman's hand:
'Arthur Stopford, 17 Rydal Avenue, Blood'
and then in a different hand:
'died later'
.
The following entry appears in the handwritten medical records:
'29.8.95 V
(
visit
)
not well at all
pulse 90-100 irregular 120/70
Rep
Abdo
Nothing to point at particularly
Blood Hb
U & E
BS
LFT's
??dying
Review with results'
.
Dr Grenville interpreted this note to indicate that Shipman had visited Mr Stopford and had found him unwell. His pulse was slightly rapid and irregular but blood pressure was normal. Respiration and the abdomen were normal. The note records that blood samples were taken for various tests.
There are three entries in the computerised records, dated 30th
August 1995, recording the results of the various tests undertaken at the hospital:
'urine exam. - general ok
Liver function tests - general OK
Renal Function tests OK'
.
Finally, on 1st
September, there is an entry which says:
'Examination of faeces normal'
.
The death is not recorded in the medical records, save that the date and cause of death are noted on the front of the Lloyd George folder.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), giving the sole cause of death as
'old age'
. He said that he had last seen Mr Stopford alive on the day of his death. A post-mortem examination would not be held. He said that he had seen the body after death.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He said that death had occurred at
'About 4.00 in the afternoon'
of 29th
August 1995. He claimed that he had attended Mr Stopford during his last illness for a period of four days. He said that he had last seen Mr Stopford alive about two hours before his death and made a complete external examination of the body about one hour after death. The mode of death was said to be syncope of only seconds' duration. When asked to what extent his answers to the questions relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or the statements of others, he did not answer the question, but wrote:
'Found by grand-daughter “asleep” in
chair
Seen by neighbour
1
/
2
-
3
/
4
hr before
this'
.
Despite extensive efforts by the Inquiry, the neighbour referred to by Shipman has not been found. The family finds Shipman's assertion that a neighbour saw Mr Stopford strange because he did not associate with any of his neighbours and never invited people into his flat. In addition, he would never go out of his flat without a member of his family.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville said that Shipman's note of 29th
August 1995 is inadequate because it does not state in what way Mr Stopford was 'not well at all'. The only abnormality recorded is a slightly fast and irregular pulse rate. There was nothing in Shipman's note to justify the suggestion that Mr Stopford might be dying. Dr Grenville has observed that, if Shipman did feel that Mr Stopford was dying, he should have arranged urgent hospital admission because, on his own admission, he had no idea what was the cause of Mr Stopford's problem.
In Dr Grenville's view, there is nothing in Shipman's note of 29th
August 1995 that would allow him to diagnose the cause of death if Mr Stopford was found dead some two hours after his visit. The results of the blood tests that day were not significantly abnormal and all could be explained as the effects of an acute attack of gastroenteritis. The results did not confirm Shipman's assertion that Mr Stopford was seriously ill and dying when the blood was taken. Dr Grenville concluded that the certified cause of death as old age was unjustifiable, that Shipman should not have issued the MCCD and should have referred the death to the coroner with a view to a post-mortem examination.
Conclusion
There are highly suspicious circumstances surrounding this death. The first and most obvious is the temporal connection between Shipman's visit and the discovery of Mr Stopford's death. Although Shipman sought to establish that an unidentified neighbour had seen Mr Stopford alive after he, Shipman, had left, there is no evidence that such a neighbour existed. As there was no neighbour present in the house when Shipman came to see the body, it is hard to imagine how he could have discovered this information. There must be a very strong suspicion that this neighbour is an invention of Shipman, designed to avoid any suspicion that he was associated with the death.
There is no evidence that Mr Stopford was seriously ill. He had not seen Shipman for about three months before 26th
August. He appears to have had a very unpleasant attack of gastroenteritis. However, the results of the tests taken on the day of the death do not indicate that Mr Stopford was very ill. It is hard to imagine how Mr Stopford could have died a natural death three days later. It unfortunately seems that Shipman planned to kill Mr Stopford some time before he died, which would explain why he told Mr Stopford's daughter that he had cancer.
As Dr Grenville said, it was not acceptable for Shipman to ascribe Mr Stopford's death to old age. Dr Grenville told the Inquiry that old age is justifiable as a cause of death in an elderly person who has been ill for some considerable time and where there has been multiple organ failure and a gradual deterioration to the point of death. In those circumstances, if the doctor is unsure of the precise mechanism of death, it is acceptable to say that the cause of death is old age. Clearly, this did not apply in Mr Stopford's case.
Taking these factors together, I am driven to the clear conclusion that Shipman killed Mr Stopford. It was particularly easy for Shipman to kill a patient from whom he wished to take blood samples. Shipman had an opportunity to introduce a needle into a patient's veins. Many patients do not watch when their doctor takes a blood sample. Shipman had an opportunity to give a lethal injection of opiate when he had taken the blood samples. I have no doubt that is what happened with Mr Stopford.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001