The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Kate Maud Sellors
Introduction
Mrs Kate Maud Sellors (known as Kit) died at her home, Flat 6 Ashton House, Victoria Street, Hyde on Thursday, 4th
May 1995 at the age of 75. She had been a patient of Shipman since 1986 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker reported that he regarded the death of Mrs Sellors as highly suspicious, on account of the contents of her medical notes and records. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Linda Marshall (Mrs Sellors' stepdaughter) and Mrs Julie Anne Dick (the resident scheme co-ordinator at Ashton House). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Sellors, but an inquest into her death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mrs Marshall and Mrs Dick. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Sellors' general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Sellors was widowed in about 1985. Following her husband's death, she continued to live in Denton until she moved into sheltered accommodation at Ashton House in March 1994. She retained her independence and is described by Mrs Marshall as having been in 'good health for her age'.
The medical records reveal that Mrs Sellors had asthma and other breathing problems, referred to as bronchitis and chronic obstructive airways disease. She took antibiotics or used an inhaler when necessary. Thyroid problems were controlled by medication. In April 1994, she underwent an operation on her bladder from which she made an uneventful recovery. Dr Grenville, who has examined the medical records, says that Mrs Sellors occasionally had raised blood pressure, but this was never sustained. In 1990, she was found to have raised cholesterol and this put her at a slightly higher than normal risk of heart attack.
On 21st
April 1995, Mrs Sellors was seen by Dr Damri, a locum doctor at the Market Street Surgery. A detailed note of the consultation appears in the Lloyd George notes. Mrs Sellors was
'off balance'
and feeling
'wobbly on feet'
. Her vision had been blurred and she had had an episode of vertigo two weeks before the examination. Her blood pressure was raised at 170/110. Dr Damri thought she had a minor problem with her organ of balance. He suggested that her blood pressure should be reviewed in two weeks' time.
The Events of the Week Leading up to Death
Mrs Marshall used to see her stepmother most evenings on her way home from work. She last saw her on either Monday, 1st
May or Tuesday, 2nd
May 1995. She remembers that Mrs Sellors had vomited on her blouse but, beyond that, cannot recall any detail of the visit.
Mrs Dick worked two separate shifts at Ashton House. The first was from 7.30am to 11.30am. The second was from 5pm to 10.30pm. Her first task each morning was to visit each resident. She would usually visit Mrs Sellors at about 8.30am.
On the morning of Monday, 1st
May, Mrs Sellors told Mrs Dick that she felt 'off colour' and had made an appointment to see Shipman at the afternoon surgery. However, during the day, Mrs Sellors fainted in the bathroom and was unable to go to the surgery. It was arranged that Shipman would visit the following day. An entry in the visits book for 2nd
May records as follows:
'Kate Sellors...passed out yesterday. not feeling too well...Julie.'
.
'Julie'
must refer to Mrs Dick who must have requested the visit. There is a handwritten entry on an unidentified Lloyd George card, found with Mrs Sellors' records, which says
'2.5.93. TCI'
.
The only entry in the computerised medical records for 2nd
May refers to a geriatric health examination. There is an entry dated 3rd
May which reads as follows:
'Collapse - symptom tci review thursday'
. It seems likely that that entry refers to a visit made on Tuesday, 2nd
May. Dr Grenville says that the note is inadequate because it does not record the history and examination that led Shipman to make a diagnosis of transient cerebral ischaemia
('tci')
.
When Mrs Dick visited on Wednesday, 3rd
May, Mrs Sellors was up and dressed and appeared in good health.
The Day of the Death
When Mrs Dick arrived on the morning of Thursday, 4th
May, Mrs Sellors said that she was feeling unwell. She was wearing her nightdress and dressing gown. She asked Mrs Dick to telephone the surgery and ask Shipman to visit. She did not say to Mrs Dick that Shipman had already visited her that morning. The entry in the visits book reads as follows:
'Kate Sellors...see Tuesday. Slight stroke. very unsteady on feet, headache affecting R eye'
.
When Mrs Dick came back on duty at about 4.30pm, she went to Mrs Sellors' flat to see how she was. She found her lying on the settee, still in her dressing gown. Her left arm was by her side, with the palm of her left hand facing upwards. Her left sleeve was rolled up. One of her eyes was open and she was wearing her glasses, which were askew. Mrs Dick could not feel a pulse. She was stunned. She left the flat and telephoned Shipman's surgery. Mrs Dick told the receptionist that Mrs Sellors was dead. Shipman came to the telephone and said, 'I expected it. I'll be round in ten minutes.' Mrs Dick thought this was a strange thing to say. Shipman arrived shortly afterwards, checked for a pulse and declared Mrs Sellors dead. He did not say that he had visited her that day and he did not mention having given her an injection.
By the time Mrs Marshall arrived home from work, her husband had received a message that she was to go to Ashton House immediately. They went together and learned of Mrs Sellors' death. Mr Marshall saw Shipman leaving Mrs Sellors' flat but no words were exchanged. Mrs Marshall recalled that when she arrived at Ashton House that evening she was told that her stepmother had been found collapsed in the bathroom and had vomited. However, Mrs Dick says that the collapse in the bathroom occurred on the Monday of that week and it seems likely that she is right and Mrs Marshall's recollection is confused.
Two residents of Ashton House, both of whom are now dead, told Mrs Dick that they had seen Shipman arriving at 2pm. They had let him into the building. Mrs Sellors must have been able to let him into her own flat at that time.
There are four separate entries dated 4th
May on the surgery computer. The first three entries relate to either one or two visits during which Mrs Sellors was alive. They read:
'CVA - cerebrovascular accid due to intracerebral haemorrhage
minor to think of admission'
'Seen in own home
Dr H F Shipman'
'Had a chat to patient
organise d/v 130/80 r cva'
.
Dr Grenville took these entries to mean that Shipman saw Mrs Sellors on 4th
May, diagnosed a stroke of the haemorrhagic type, which he thought was minor but that he advised Mrs Sellors to think about admission to hospital. It seems to me that the third entry seeks to suggest that it relates to a second visit later in the day. Shipman then recorded that he would organise a domiciliary visit by a consultant. The blood pressure was 130/80, which is normal. His diagnosis was a right-sided stroke. Dr Grenville says that it is not possible to distinguish between a haemorrhagic and an occlusive stroke on clinical grounds. The question as to whether Mrs Sellors required hospital admission would depend entirely upon whether or not she was fit to cope at home. If she was unable to cope, she should have been admitted. It is not clear why Shipman should have felt that a domiciliary visit by a consultant was appropriate. He had made his diagnosis and there was no specific treatment for the problem. A consultant would not have been able to add anything.
The last entry relates to Shipman's visit after he had been informed that Mrs Sellors had died. It says:
'O/E - dead
cva coad 1700hrs'
.
The final entry in the Lloyd George notes reads as follows:
'V
(
visit
)
1810
4.30CVA
certified
(
There is then some text crossed out which appears to have
read
hypertension
)
Chronic Bronchitis'
.
I interpret this to mean that Shipman visited Mrs Sellors' flat at 6.10pm and certified her to be dead. He said that she had died of a cerebrovascular accident at 4.30pm. She had had chronic bronchitis.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and certified the cause of death to be cerebrovascular accident. The approximate interval between onset and death was certified to be between one and one and a half hours. Chronic obstructive airway (
sic
) disease was certified to be a condition contributing to death, but unrelated to the cerebrovascular accident, and the interval between onset of that condition and death was certified to be nine years. The MCCD records that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that Mrs Sellors' body was seen after death by Shipman.
The Aftermath
Mrs Marshall went to see Shipman a few days after her stepmother's death. He told her that Mrs Sellors had suffered a minor stroke on the morning of her death and that he had seen her at about 8am, at which time she was 'coming to consciousness of her own volition'. He said that he visited Mrs Sellors later that day and 'gave her an injection to help her'. In her statement to the police, Mrs Marshall stated that Shipman had said the injection was 'to bring her round'. Shipman went on to say that, later that day, Mrs Sellors had suffered a massive stroke that had killed her. Mrs Marshall suggested to Shipman that there would be no need for a post-mortem examination as he had seen Mrs Sellors on the day of her death and Shipman agreed. Shipman apparently then said, 'She'll be cremated won't she?' Mrs Marshall said that Mrs Sellors would be buried in the family plot at Denton Cemetery. Shipman said that Mrs Marshall now had one less thing to worry about.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Baker considered Mrs Sellors' medical records and concluded that her death was highly suspicious. He commented:
'Relatively quick death due to cva; no indication that d/v was arranged; information on record does not point to a major, life threatening cva...
...Death in the afternoon from cva following visit from Shipman - history slightly longer than the typical pattern but must be regarded as suspicious'
.
Dr Grenville comments that Shipman's notes relating to the death were
'entirely inadequate and give no justification for his diagnoses of transient cerebral ischaemia and cerebrovascular accident'
.
Dr Grenville does not rule out the possibility that Mrs Sellors had suffered from a minor stroke in the days and weeks leading up to her death and that she then suffered from a later, more significant stroke on 4th
May. In support of this conclusion he refers to the symptoms recorded by Dr Damri on 21st
April and Mrs Sellors' collapse earlier that week.
Dr Grenville says that there is no injection that might be administered to a person suffering from a stroke which could be expected
'to bring the person round'
. I note that the medical records make no reference to an injection.
Dr Grenville advises that medical opinion is not helpful in determining whether the death was natural or an unlawful killing. The answer is to be found by an assessment of the facts and a decision as to the truthfulness of Shipman's entries in the medical records.
Conclusion
As Dr Grenville has said, it is possible that Mrs Sellors died of a stroke during the afternoon of 4th
May. However, there are a number of highly suspicious factors surrounding her death.
Mrs Sellors was discovered to be dead shortly after a visit from Shipman. This visit probably took place at about 2pm. Shipman was the last person to see her alive. This in itself is a highly suspicious factor.
Shipman said to Mrs Marshall that he had visited Mrs Sellors at around 8am. He could have done, although it seems unlikely. There is no reason to think that Mrs Dick would have visited Mrs Sellors earlier than her usual time of 8.30am. If Shipman had already been to see Mrs Sellors, it is highly unlikely that she would have asked Mrs Dick to telephone the surgery without telling her that Shipman had been there within the last half hour. We know that Mrs Dick telephoned the surgery, which did not open until about 8.30am. We know that her message was recorded by a receptionist in the usual way. Until about 8am, Shipman's calls would usually be transferred to the deputising service, Healthcall, who would contact Shipman to see whether he wished a duty doctor to attend or to deal with the matter himself. Only if Mrs Dick had telephoned very early could a message have reached Shipman before he arrived at the surgery. It is possible that Mrs Dick had visited Mrs Sellors very early and had then telephoned the surgery and a message had reached Shipman before he left home. So he could have visited Mrs Sellors at 8am as he claimed. However, this is very unlikely, first because I think Mrs Dick would have remembered that unusual course of events and second because I would not then have expected to find the message requesting a visit recorded in the visits book by a member of staff. I am almost certain his claim to have visited at 8am is a lie.
Experience shows that Shipman's medical records can never be relied on as an honest or accurate account of events. These notes contain familiar suspicious features. It appears to me that in making entries on the computer Shipman has tried to create the impression that he visited twice on 4th
May while Mrs Sellors was still alive. Shipman does not state this expressly but he seeks to give the impression that, on a first occasion, he diagnosed a minor haemorrhagic stroke and advised Mrs Sellors that she should be admitted to hospital; he implies that she was not keen on the idea. This is a regular feature of Shipman's explanations of the circumstances surrounding his patients' deaths. In this series of notes, Shipman implies that he visited Mrs Sellors later in the day, to see what she had decided and, because she would not go to hospital, he decided to arrange a domiciliary visit by a consultant. This again is a common feature of cases in which Shipman has killed. The patient always dies before the consultant is contacted. The notes do not make good medical sense. As Dr Grenville has observed, it is not possible to distinguish between a haemorrhagic and an occlusive stroke on clinical grounds. Nor is there any sensible reason to call a consultant if the patient declines to go into hospital. If Mrs Sellors had really refused to go to hospital, it would have made sense if Shipman had sought to make arrangements for her care at home. I think these notes are fabricated.
Shipman admitted having administered an injection. He might have made this admission because he was aware that he had left Mrs Sellors' sleeve rolled up. As far as Dr Grenville is aware, there is no injection that might appropriately be administered to a patient suffering a stroke in the circumstances described by Shipman. On the other hand, Shipman's method of unlawfully killing his patients was to administer a lethal dose of opiates by injection.
Shipman's response to the news of the death is suspicious. He said he had expected Mrs Sellors to die. In his generic evidence to the Inquiry, Dr Grenville stated that of patients suffering a cerebrovascular accident approximately one third would be expected to die within a month, another third would survive but with disability and may die later of the complications and the final third would make a reasonable recovery. In the computerised medical records Shipman described the cerebrovascular accident as minor in nature. Therefore, even if Mrs Sellors' presentation was as recorded in the medical notes, far from there being an expectation of death, death would have come as a surprise. Of course, Shipman would not have been surprised at the news of the death if he already knew she was dead.
Taking these matters into account, I have come to the conclusion that Shipman killed Mrs Sellors. I do not think that he visited her at 8am. I think he visited her at about 2pm. She might well have suffered a minor stroke. I think it likely that he gave her an injection, not to 'bring her round' but to kill her. It is likely that the injection was diamorphine, which we know he often had with him. I think he made a false set of entries on the computer after the event. Although there is a theoretical possibility that Mrs Sellors suffered a fatal stroke, I feel able to say that I am sure that Shipman killed her.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001