The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ernest Shawcross
Introduction
Mr Ernest Shawcross died at his home, 47 Lyne View, Hyde on Sunday, 11th
March 1979 at the age of 74. He was registered as a patient of Dr Smith at the Donneybrook Surgery. The death was referred to the coroner and, following a post-mortem examination without inquest, the coroner certified that the cause of Mr Shawcross' death was gastro-intestinal haemorrhage due to acute gastric ulceration.
Mr Shawcross' death did not form part of the police investigation into Shipman's activities. It came to the attention of the Inquiry in the course of a search of the files of the South Manchester Coroner for deaths which had been referred to the coroner and in which Shipman was involved in some way.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Shawcross' son and daughter, Mr Kenneth Shawcross and Mrs Dorothy Hudson. Mrs Hudson says that her recollection of events in 1979 is poor because she was unwell at the time. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1979. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Professor Helen Whitwell.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Shawcross was a widower and lived alone. He looked after himself. He was in regular contact with his family. He used to see his son, Mr Kenneth Shawcross, at least once a week and, also, often on a Sunday. Mrs Hudson would see him on Thursdays. His other three sons, Mr Roy Shawcross, Mr Stanley Shawcross and Mr Geoffrey Shawcross, did not live in the Hyde area. Mr Shawcross was very friendly with Mrs Gee, a neighbour.
Mr Shawcross was overweight and had a slight limp, but was otherwise well. He was a keen gardener and grew tomatoes and marrows in his greenhouse.
On the morning of Thursday, 8th
March 1979, Mr Shawcross called on his son and daughter-in-law. He said that he was on his way to see the doctor, as he had 'pulled his stomach'. Mrs Hudson recalls that, later that morning, at about 11.30am, she met her father in Hyde. She was shocked to see that he looked so unwell. His face was grey and ashen. He said that he had a bad stomach and had seen the doctor, who had given him a bottle of medicine. Mrs Hudson did not see her father again that day. Mr Kenneth Shawcross called in to see his father at about 6pm that evening. His father said that the doctor had prescribed some medication for his stomach. Mr Kenneth Shawcross does not remember his father looking unwell.
The Day of the Death
Mr Kenneth Shawcross worked a night shift on Saturday, 10th
March. At about lunchtime on Sunday, 11th
March, his wife, Joan, woke him and said that Mrs Gee had called round to say that his father was poorly and that he should go round and see him.
Mr Kenneth Shawcross went to his father's home and found him lying on the couch, clasping his stomach. Mrs Gee said that the doctor had been to visit Mr Shawcross and given him some tablets. Mr Shawcross looked drawn and said that his stomach was bad, but otherwise appeared to his son to be 'alright in himself'.
Mrs Hudson recalls that Mr Kenneth Shawcross called on her at lunchtime on Sunday, 11th
March, to say that their father was unwell. He told her that their father had gone to collect his newspaper and had collapsed when calling on Mrs Gee. Mr Shawcross had somehow returned to his own home. Mrs Hudson was told that Shipman had called and had given Mr Shawcross two tablets. This account of the morning tallies with an account given to Mr Kenneth Shawcross some time later by a work colleague who told him that he had seen his father out that morning, leaning against a lamp-post, and that he looked terrible.
Mr Kenneth Shawcross, Mrs Hudson and other members of the family were with Mr Shawcross in the afternoon. He was lying on the couch and was conscious, although slightly drowsy. Suddenly he made a choking noise and died.
The doctor was called and Shipman attended. When he had examined Mr Shawcross, he said, 'This should never have happened for what I treated him for this morning'.
The Referral to the Coroner
The Report of Death to the Coroner records that Mr Shawcross was registered with Dr Smith and that he had collapsed and died at home at 3.20pm, having complained of stomach pains. It is recorded within the Report that the
'Dr cannot issue'
. That suggests that Shipman declined to certify the cause of death and referred the death to the coroner.
The Greater Manchester Police document entitled Report of Sudden Death also records that Mr Shawcross died at 3.20pm. Under the heading 'Brief Medical History' the following information is recorded:
'visited own doctor 8.3.79 with stomach pains.
Collapsed at home 11am 11.3.79 complaining of chest
pains. Given injections by emergency Doctor
SHIPMAN. Told to rest on setee
(
sic
)
, where he died
3.20pm same day'
.
The Report then records the timings of two visits by Shipman that day, the first at 11am and the second, after the death, at 3.40pm.
The Greater Manchester Police document entitled Medical History in a Case of Sudden Death contains a similar account. Again, there is a note in which Shipman is said to have visited at 11am. There is also a note that Mr Shawcross had been prescribed Poly Gel Forte and Panadol, although there is no explanation as to the time or circumstances in which those drugs were given. Panadol is a painkiller. Polygeline is one of the constituents used in preparations given by infusion to deal with depletion of plasma volume caused, amongst other things, by concealed internal haemorrhage. It could be that this was prescribed either by Dr Smith on 8th
March or by Shipman on 11th
March, but the lack of detail on the form and the absence of any medical records mean that I cannot be sure.
Mr Shawcross' name appears in Shipman's visits book for Sunday 11th
March, and alongside his name appear Dr Smith's name and the letters
'CHF'
(which stand for congestive heart failure).
The Post-Mortem Examination
Internal examination revealed no atheroma of the cerebral circulation and only mild atheroma of the coronary arteries. There were dense pleural adhesions on both sides of the chest. The bronchi were inflamed and dilated. The lungs were very congested and oedematous. There were several small erosions on the greater curvature of the stomach and altered blood was present throughout the gastro-intestinal tract.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Helen Whitwell has considered the post-mortem examination report and she has said that the erosions, or superficial areas of ulceration, are acceptable and well-recognised causes of gastro-intestinal haemorrhage. It would be unusual, but possible, for a haemorrhage to cause death. The symptoms of such haemorrhage could be present for some days prior to death and would include stomach pains and possibly chest pains. Professor Whitwell said that, in a patient suffering from gastro-intestinal haemorrhage, consideration should be given to admission to hospital, particularly following collapse. She felt unable to comment on the nature of the injections said to have been given by Shipman or the effect that these may have had on Mr Shawcross.
The Aftermath
Mrs Joan Shawcross worked as a cleaner at the Donneybrook Surgery in 1979. Some time after Mr Shawcross' death, Dr Smith told her that Mr Shawcross had consulted him about his stomach problems. Dr Smith had asked whether he was passing any blood, but Mr Shawcross said he was not. Dr Smith said that, if Mr Shawcross had said that he was passing blood, he would have sent him to hospital. Following that conversation, Mr and Mrs Shawcross examined Mr Shawcross' mattress and found a number of bloodstains, both old and new. This suggested to them that Mr Shawcross had been passing blood for some time.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mr Shawcross died a natural death.
The nature of the treatment given by Shipman during his visit on the morning of 11th
March is unclear. It is recorded in the two reports prepared by the police that Shipman gave Mr Shawcross at least one injection. The recollection of both Mr Kenneth Shawcross and Mrs Hudson, however, is that they were told that Shipman gave him tablets. That does not exclude the possibility that Shipman gave both an injection and tablets. If Shipman did give an injection, it cannot have caused Mr Shawcross' death. If it had been a large dose of opiate, Mr Shawcross would have fallen asleep soon afterwards and would have died within the hour. As it was, he remained awake for some hours after Shipman's first visit.
Professor Henry McQuay and Dr John Grenville have given joint generic evidence to the Inquiry as to the timing and effect of opiates. If a lethal injection of opiates is given intravenously, death follows within minutes. If given intramuscularly, a lethal injection would cause death within about an hour. According to the reports prepared by the police at the time, Shipman visited Mr Shawcross at about 11am, and Mr Shawcross died more than four hours later at 3.20pm.
There is a possibility that Shipman misdiagnosed Mr Shawcross' condition. He seems to have thought that Mr Shawcross had congestive heart failure. This might explain why he did not arrange for Mr Shawcross to be admitted to hospital and why he seemed surprised at the death. I have the impression that his surprise was genuine and think he might have made an honest mistake about Mr Shawcross' condition. I think he probably gave an injection designed to relieve congestive heart failure, which Mr Shawcross did not have. It is not now possible to discover what treatment he gave or why. However, resolution of this issue does not affect the ultimate issue as to whether Shipman unlawfully killed Mr Shawcross.
There seems no doubt as to the cause of death. The physical findings and the witness evidence are consistent with death due to gastro-intestinal haemorrhage.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001