The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Winifred Isabel Smith
Introduction
Mrs Winifred Isabel Smith died at her home, 14 Longfield Way, Todmorden on Monday, 7th
April 1975 at the age of 67. Mrs Smith was registered with the Abraham Ormerod Medical Practice, where Shipman was a partner, but it is not known whether she was Shipman's patient. He had been practising in Todmorden for a little over 12 months at the time of Mrs Smith's death. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the right breast.
Mrs Smith's death was one of the 22 deaths for which the cause was certified by Shipman during his time in Todmorden. Following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's clinical audit in January 2001, the police investigated the death and took a statement from Mr Paul Broadley Smith, Mrs Smith's son.
There was no inquest after Mrs Smith's death but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mr Smith. Mrs Smith's medical records have not survived. The Inquiry has obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Smith lived with her husband, Mr Sidney Smith, in a one-bedroomed flat. Some years before she died, Mrs Smith was diagnosed as suffering from cancer. She was initially treated at the Christie Hospital and appeared to make progress. Her symptoms returned, however, and, just before Christmas 1974, members of staff at Halifax General Hospital told Mrs Smith that the cancer was terminal. The family was told to 'take her home to die'. Between them, Mr Paul Smith and his brother, Mr Phillip Draffan Smith, were able to keep a presence at their parents' house in order to care for Mrs Smith.
Mr Paul Smith remembers that, after Christmas 1974, his mother's condition deteriorated markedly. From that time, she slept a great deal and was awake for only about an hour each day. During the last few weeks of her life, she had to be carried between the bathroom and her bed. The doctor, believed to be Shipman, visited quite frequently, as did the district nurse. Mr Paul Smith does not know what medication his mother was taking but thinks she was on morphine injections for pain relief. Mrs Smith also took tablets to prevent her being sick.
On one occasion, a few weeks prior to Mrs Smith's death, Mr Paul Smith arrived at the flat to find the doctor walking with his mother, up and down the interior corridor of the flat. It was obvious to Mr Smith that his mother was in a great deal of pain and he asked the doctor why he was making her walk. The doctor, who Mr Smith believes to have been Shipman, replied, 'One day you will thank me for this, son'. Mr Smith felt that the doctor was lacking in compassion and consideration. The doctor then returned Mrs Smith to her bed.
The Day of the Death
Mr Paul Smith left his parents' flat, where he had stayed overnight, at about midday on 7th
April, at which time his mother's condition was as bad as it had been for the preceding two weeks. He returned to his own flat, intending to go to work in the mid-afternoon. After he had been at home for about an hour, Mr Smith received a message from his father, via a neighbour, to say that Mrs Smith had died.
Mr Paul Smith does not know if Shipman visited his mother in the hours or even the day before her death. The family expected her death.
Certification
Shipman certified that the cause of Mrs Smith's death was carcinomatosis, due to carcinoma of the right breast. Mrs Smith was buried at Peel Green Cemetery in Eccles, so there are no cremation documents. As neither the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death nor its counterfoil has survived, there is no documentary evidence as to when Shipman last saw Mrs Smith alive.
Shipman's Interview
Shipman was interviewed on 28th
November 1975 by the police and a Home Office Drugs Inspector about offences relating to the prescribing of pethidine. During the course of that interview, he admitted that he had signed a number of prescriptions for pethidine in the name of Mrs Smith. He was shown four prescriptions made out to Mrs Smith and said that they were all for the same person, commenting,
'She was a terminal case, and she probably had about a full box of 10, but I had the rest. She was Dr Dacre's patient'
.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville has provided a report in this case. He had available to him the statements and documents held by the Inquiry. Dr Grenville noted the history, particularly that Mrs Smith suffered from metastatic cancer of the breast and that her condition gradually deteriorated in the months before she died. Dr Grenville commented that this is consistent with a diagnosis of carcinomatosis.
Whilst Dr Grenville acknowledged that he could think of no reason why Shipman or any other doctor would have asked Mrs Smith to walk up and down when it caused her pain, he concluded that this incident did not have any bearing on her eventual death.
Conclusion
Mrs Smith was suffering from advanced cancer of the breast, which had spread to other parts of her body. From the description given, it appears that she was in the terminal phase of her illness.
Although Shipman admitted having prescribed and administered pethidine to Mrs Smith, the family was aware of this and the administration of an opiate would have been entirely appropriate for the relief of pain, given the advanced state of Mrs Smith's cancer.
Although there is no evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Smith shortly before her death, there is no evidence that he did not. For that reason, I am unable to reach any positive conclusion as to Shipman's involvement in this death. If Shipman did give Mrs Smith a lethal dose of opiate, it would appear that her life was shortened by only a small margin.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001