The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Joe Ainscow Stansfield
Introduction
Mr Joe Ainscow Stansfield died at his home, 84 Halifax Road, Todmorden on Sunday, 6th
April 1975 at the age of 77. He was registered as a patient at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Practice, where Shipman was a partner. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Stansfield's death was respiratory arrest due to chronic bronchitis with emphysema.
Mr Stansfield's death was one of the 22 deaths for which the cause was certified by Shipman during his time in Todmorden. Following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's clinical audit in January 2001, the police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Ann Wood, Mr Stansfield's daughter.
No inquest was held at the time of Mr Stansfield's death but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Wood and Mrs Jeanne Stansfield, Mr Stansfield's daughter-in-law, and has obtained reports from Dr John Grenville and Professor Richard Baker. Mr Stansfield's medical records have not survived and there are no surgery records. Only the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and the cremation certificate have survived.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Stansfield lived with his wife, Mrs Sarah Jane ('Sally') Stansfield, who has since died. Mrs Wood lived some distance away. Mr Stansfield's son, Mr Ronald Stansfield, lived with his wife, Jeanne, in the Midlands. Mr Stansfield used to see his son and daughter and their families every two months or so. Mr Ronald Stansfield died in 1991.
Mr Stansfield spent most of his working life as a chauffeur for a local Todmorden doctor called Dr Thorpe. When Dr Thorpe retired in about 1960, Mr Stansfield became a taxi driver.
Mr Stansfield had been a heavy smoker throughout his life and had suffered from breathing difficulties since the 1950s. He had a wheezy chest and, in the later years of his life, suffered from emphysema. Mrs Jeanne Stansfield observed a deterioration in her father-in-law's condition during the last few years of his life. She remembers that he slept downstairs during the winter months, as the warmth of the fire helped his breathing. He used an oxygen cylinder when his breathing was very bad. During this time, the family found that he was rather quarrelsome, which Dr Grenville says is not uncommon in patients suffering from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Mrs Wood last saw her father alive at Christmas 1974. He was mobile and was able to go for walks with his grandchildren and also go for a drink with his friends. Mrs Jeanne Stansfield last saw him alive during the weekend of 1st
March 1975. She retains her diary for that period and says that, if her father-in-law had been seriously unwell, she would have recorded that.
Mrs Wood and her husband intended to visit her parents over Easter 1975. The trip was cancelled after Mrs Stansfield wrote to her saying that Mr Stansfield was having 'one of his bad patches'. This was the first time that a visit had been cancelled due to Mr Stansfield's ill health.
There is no evidence about which doctor or doctors visited Mr Stansfield during this period or how frequently he was visited.
The Day of the Death
Between 11.30am and midday on 6th
April 1975, Mrs Wood received a telephone call from her cousin's husband, Mr Clifford Suthers, who has since died. He said that Mr Stansfield was very unwell and was not expected to last the day, and he asked that Mrs Wood travel up to Todmorden. At about the same time, Mr Suthers also telephoned Mr Ronald Stansfield, who travelled to Todmorden, arriving between 2pm and 2.30pm. Mr Ronald Stansfield and his mother met Mrs Wood at Halifax bus station later that afternoon. They informed her that Mr Stansfield had died.
Mrs Wood did not discuss the details of her father's death with her mother. She was not told how her father died or who was present at the moment of death. Mrs Stansfield did tell her, however, that, during the evening before he died, Mr Stansfield had 'made up' with Mrs Stansfield. He told her that he appreciated what a good wife and mother she had been. Although he had been sleeping downstairs for some weeks prior to that evening, he insisted on going up to bed with his wife. Although this was difficult, Mr Stansfield managed to climb the stairs and the couple slept in the same bed on the last night of his life. Mrs Wood interpreted this as a premonition on her father's part that he was about to die and he was making peace with his wife.
Mrs Jeanne Stansfield did speak to Mrs Stansfield about the circumstances of her husband's death. Mrs Stansfield said that, as her husband was dying, he lay on the bed, staring blankly towards the top of the wardrobe. She was holding his hand when he died. Importantly, Mrs Stansfield did not say that the doctor was present at the death, and Mrs Jeanne Stansfield thinks that, if the doctor had been present, Mrs Stansfield would have said so.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death, as the death certificate records that he certified that the cause of death was respiratory arrest due to chronic bronchitis with emphysema.
Mr Stansfield was cremated and Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He recorded the time of death as
'13.45hrs'
. He said he had been Mr Stansfield's medical attendant for one year and had attended him in his last illness during that time. He said that he last saw Mr Stansfield alive on the day of his death but he did not say at what time. He said he saw the body immediately after death and performed a complete examination. The cause of death was said to be respiratory arrest, as stated on the death certificate. He said that the mode of death was exhaustion of two to three hours' duration. He stated that his answers to the questions as to the cause and mode of death were made on the basis of his own observations. He said that Mr Stansfield was nursed by his wife during his last illness and she was the only person present at the moment of death.
Dr Stella Brown completed Form C of the cremation certificate. She said that she interviewed Mrs Stansfield and questioned Shipman. She was satisfied that the cause of death was as stated by Shipman.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville noted that Mr Stansfield suffered from severe COPD, more marked in winter, for many years prior to his death. In the absence of the medical records, Dr Grenville was unable to comment on Mr Stansfield's treatment. The use of oxygen indicates that he had reached the stage of being seriously ill.
Dr Grenville thought it was unclear from Form B whether Shipman was present at the moment of Mr Stansfield's death. However, it seems to me that Shipman was saying that he was not present at the moment of death. He had visited earlier that day and was called back to see the body immediately after death.
Dr Grenville noted that Dr Brown completed Form C of the cremation certificate and that she was likely to have been satisfied that the particulars given to her by Shipman were consistent with the information given to her by Mrs Stansfield.
Dr Grenville concluded that there was no evidence that Mr Stansfield died of anything other than natural causes and that the cause of his death was end-stage COPD.
At the invitation of the West Yorkshire Police, Professor Baker considered whether the death of Mr Stansfield was suspicious. He had available to him a summary of the police witness statement of Mrs Wood and the cremation certificate. Professor Baker noted that Shipman recorded having last seen Mr Stansfield alive on the day of his death and then immediately after death. From this, he drew the inference that it was likely that Shipman was present at the moment of death. Professor Baker stated that it was unclear why Mr Stansfield had suffered a respiratory arrest and speculated that one explanation could be that Shipman had administered an intravenous injection of pethidine. Professor Baker also commented that, if Mr Stansfield had not been expected to die, it would have been usual for an ambulance to have been summoned or, alternatively, attempts to have been made by Shipman to resuscitate Mr Stansfield. Taking the evidence of Mrs Wood and the cremation certificate together, Professor Baker concluded that the death of Mr Stansfield was highly suspicious.
The Inquiry reverted to Professor Baker and provided him with all the material now available. His opinion now is that it is
'90% certain that the death was natural, and 10% uncertain'
.
Conclusion
It is clear that Mr Stansfield was extremely unwell in the weeks leading up to his death. It appears to me that he had reached the terminal stage of his illness.
The main indicator of suspicion in this case is the fact that Shipman last visited Mr Stansfield on the day of his death and that he recorded having seen Mr Stansfield immediately after death. Professor Baker inferred from these two facts that it was likely that Shipman was present at the moment of death. I agree that that inference is possible, although Shipman had expressly said that only Mrs Stansfield was present at the death. Such further evidence as is now available makes it appear unlikely that Shipman was present at the death. Mrs Stansfield did not mention the doctor's presence at the death in circumstances where she might have been expected to mention it had he been there. I conclude that it is unlikely that Shipman was present at the death.
However, that does not dispose entirely of all possible causes for suspicion. It would have been quite possible for Shipman to give Mr Stansfield an intramuscular injection of an excessive dose of opiate or sedative and to go away, leaving him to lapse into unconsciousness and death during the following hours. However, it does not appear likely that this occurred. It appears that the imminence of the death was appreciated by Mr Suthers by about 11.30am; that is, over two hours before it occurred. Either the imminence of the death must have been obvious to him as a layman or he had been advised by Shipman that the death was likely to occur that day. If the latter, we know approximately when Shipman was there. Professor Henry McQuay and Dr Grenville have said that if a lethal dose of opiate is given intramuscularly, death will usually follow within the hour. Given that Mr Stansfield's respiratory function was already severely compromised, one would expect him to die quite quickly if given an opiate.
There remains the possibility that Shipman gave an injection of opiate, with the intention of relieving Mr Stansfield's distress, but recognising that the consequence might be the hastening of death. Provided this is done in the best interests of the patient, it is not unlawful.
Mrs Stansfield's description of her husband, staring at the top of the wardrobe, does not seem to me to be consistent with a death from an overdose of opiate or sedative. If he had been given an opiate or sedative, I would have thought Mr Stansfield would have fallen asleep some time before he died.
While I cannot absolutely rule out the possibility that Shipman hastened Mr Stansfield's death, it seems to me to be highly likely that the death was due to natural causes as set out on the death certificate.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001