The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Lilian Shaw
Introduction
Mrs Lilian Shaw died at her home, 922 Burnley Road, Portsmouth, Todmorden on Sunday, 27th
July 1975 at the age of 54. She was married. She was registered as a patient with Dr David Bunn, a partner of Shipman at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre in Todmorden. Following a post-mortem examination without inquest, the Deputy Coroner for the Metropolitan District of Calderdale certified that the cause of Mrs Shaw's death was subarachnoid haemorrhage due to a ruptured cerebral aneurysm.
Following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's clinical audit in January 2001, the West Yorkshire Police investigated Mrs Shaw's death, which was one of a number of deaths investigated where the cause was certified by the Deputy Coroner. The police were unable to trace any of Mrs Shaw's relatives.
Mrs Shaw's general practitioner records have not survived but the Inquiry has had access to a Report of Death prepared by the West Yorkshire Metropolitan Police, dated 26th
July 1975, and the post-mortem report prepared by Dr M C Glassett, consultant pathologist. The Inquiry has also obtained expert evidence from Professor Helen Whitwell.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
According to the Report of Death, Mrs Shaw had apparently enjoyed good health prior to her death.
On Saturday, 26th
July, Mrs Shaw seemed well and passed a normal day. She ate normal meals. She complained of a slight headache. She and her husband went to bed at 11.30am that evening.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Shaw awoke at 3am on the morning of 27th
July and told her husband that she was in some discomfort. She went to the bathroom. Minutes later, Mr Shaw heard a bang and went to the bathroom where he found his wife lying on the floor in an unconscious state and 'breathing very hard'. He called for a doctor and Shipman attended shortly afterwards. Shipman said that Mrs Shaw had very high blood pressure and had suffered a stroke on her right side. Shipman then telephoned for an ambulance. When Shipman returned to Mrs Shaw, he found that she had died and he confirmed the fact of her death. He was unable to certify the cause of death and referred the death to the coroner.
The Post-Mortem Report
At the post-mortem examination, external examination revealed no significant signs of injury. Internal examination of the skull contents revealed a subarachnoid haemorrhage as a result of a rupture of an aneurysm on the anterior communicating artery. Blood was found to have burst into the main ventricular system. Following the post-mortem examination, Dr Glassett certified that the cause of death was subarachnoid haemorrhage due to rupture of a cerebral aneurysm.
The Expert Evidence
The effect of Professor Whitwell's report is that the cause of death is definitive.
Conclusion
I am quite sure that Mrs Shaw died a natural death, the cause of which was established at post-mortem examination. The circumstances give rise to no suspicion that Shipman did anything which caused or contributed to the death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001