The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Lily Shore
Introduction
Mrs Lily Shore died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Friday, 24th
February 1978 at the age of 87. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977, about four months earlier. She thought highly of him. Initially Shipman certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia but, following a post-mortem examination and inquest, the South Manchester Coroner certified that the cause of death was suppurative bronchitis and bronchopneumonia.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Dorothy Taylor and Mrs Marian Quinn (both nieces of Mrs Shore) and Mrs Winifred Lanceley (the former owner of Charnley House). The Inquiry has also had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the coroner's file and the Charnley House daily diary for 1978. Mrs Shore's medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Shore had been a widow since her husband was killed in the First World War. She lived alone in her own home until December 1977 and enjoyed quite good health. She became a little confused and her eyesight was poor. In December 1977, she was knocked down by a milk float and sustained a hairline fracture of the pelvis. She was treated in Tameside General Hospital and made a good recovery but her mobility remained restricted and, when she went home, it soon became apparent that she could not cope. She was admitted to Charnley House in January 1978, about a month before she died.
Mrs Taylor remembers that Mrs Shore enjoyed good health until her later years. Mrs Shore suffered from a chest condition but Mrs Taylor says this was 'not disabling'. At Charnley House, Mrs Shore shared a room with another resident. Mrs Taylor and Mrs Quinn visited her regularly and both say that their aunt always seemed well when they visited.
The Weeks Leading up to Death
Mrs Lanceley does not remember Mrs Shore but she has examined the Charnley House daily diary for the two week period before Mrs Shore died. Mrs Lanceley says that the residents' health problems were usually noted in the daily diary. If a resident was not mentioned by name, it usually meant that they were well. Mrs Shore's name appears regularly in the two weeks before her death. This suggested to Mrs Lanceley that Mrs Shore was unwell. The entries suggest that Mrs Shore was not eating properly and was taking Complan, a food supplement drink.
Mrs Quinn last saw her aunt a few days before she died. She was sitting in a chair either in her bedroom or in the residents' lounge. Mrs Quinn remembers that her aunt appeared unwell and that she thought that she had influenza.
Mrs Taylor visited her aunt on Saturday, 18th
February. She also saw her one evening the following week. Although Mrs Taylor does not remember her aunt as being unwell, she does remember that she was quieter than usual.
The Day of the Death
There is an entry made by Mrs Lanceley in the Charnley House diary for 24th
February, which records that Shipman was going to visit Mrs Shore that day. The next entry in the diary concerning Mrs Shore records:
'seen by Dr Shipman no change'
. That entry is contained in the morning report. The next entry records that Mrs Shore would not eat or drink anything. The implication is that she was conscious. An entry made in the evening reports that there was no change in her condition and that she was
'very poorley
(
sic
)
'
. The final entry records that she died at 9.40pm and that her relatives had been informed. The undertaker took the body to the chapel of rest at 10.15pm. That suggests that a doctor must have come to Charnley House to pronounce life extinct. Mrs Lanceley says that, as the death occurred outside surgery hours, an emergency or deputising doctor must have come to the home. I do not think that that is necessarily so. It was the practice among the Donneybrook doctors to have a rota for out of hours duty. Most of the Donneybrook doctors would carry out their rota duty and would only hand over to the deputising service in the late evening. In any event, Mrs Lanceley cannot explain why the attendance of a doctor is not recorded in the diary.
Mrs Lanceley says that, when a doctor visited Charnley House, he or she would be accompanied by a member of staff, who would remain with the doctor during the consultation. Further, when an injection was administered to a resident, the event would be recorded in the daily diary.
Mrs Taylor remembers receiving a telephone call during the evening of 24th
February 1978 and learning that her aunt had died. She was shocked at the news. It appears that Mrs Quinn was informed the following day. Prior to Mrs Shore's death, her nieces were not told that her death was imminent, although it was the policy of the home to warn relatives. Mrs Lanceley cannot say why Mrs Shore's nieces were not warned.
Certification
Shipman completed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and although the certificate itself has not been recovered, the counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman recorded that he had last seen Mrs Shore alive on 24th
February 1978. He had initially circled the number
'1'
to indicate that the certified cause of death took account of information obtained from a post-mortem examination. That was then crossed out and he circled the number
'3'
, which indicated that a post-mortem examination would not be held. He said that he had seen the body after death. He said that the death was due to bronchopneumonia. The death of Mrs Shore was initially registered on the basis of the MCCD issued by Shipman. The date of the registration was 27th
February 1978.
Someone must have realised that Mrs Shore had had a road traffic accident not long before her death and the case was referred to the coroner who ordered a post-mortem examination and inquest. Following the inquest, the South Manchester Coroner certified that the death was due to suppurative bronchitis and bronchopneumonia. The death was registered on that basis on 22nd
March 1978.
The Post-Mortem Examination
A post-mortem examination was performed on 2nd
March 1978 by Dr David Bee, who found bronchi containing pus and foci of suppuration throughout the lower lobes of both lungs. He noted only slight atheroma of the cerebral and coronary circulation. He considered that the recent hip fracture had had no bearing on the cause of death, which was suppurative bronchitis and bronchopneumonia.
Conclusion
In my view it is overwhelmingly likely that Mrs Shore died as a result of natural causes.
Her condition, as recorded in the Charnley House diary, clearly deteriorated in the days leading up to her death. She was eating very little. When Mrs Quinn saw Mrs Shore in the week before her death she thought that she was suffering from influenza. The description of Mrs Shore's condition and the findings on post-mortem examination are consistent with death having been caused by suppurative bronchitis and bronchopneumonia.
Shipman visited Mrs Shore on 24th
February. As the visit is recorded in the morning report, I infer that he was there before 1pm. There is no record that he gave any treatment, in particular any injection. In any event, Mrs Shore appears to have been conscious some time after his departure, so he cannot have given her a lethal dose of strong opiate. Nor can he have given her an overdose of sedative. There is no record that Shipman visited again later in the day. However, the diary does not identify the doctor who pronounced life extinct following Mrs Shore's death at about 9.40pm. It is theoretically possible that Shipman returned to the home, gave Mrs Shore an injection which ended her life and pronounced her dead. However, I think it is most unlikely that Shipman would have done that at this stage in his career. He had only recently started work in Hyde. He had been obliged to tell the other Donneybrook doctors about his convictions for drug offences in early 1976. I think it is unlikely that at that time he would have risked killing a patient in a residential home. He would not then have been well known and trusted by the staff as he later became. Further, although he might have been alone with the patient for a short time, there would always be a risk that a care worker might enter the room.
My conclusion is that Mrs Shore died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001