The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Albert Edward Saunders
Introduction
Mr Albert Edward Saunders died at Hyde Nursing Home, Grange Road South, Hyde on Thursday, 9th
January 1997 at the age of 81. He had probably been a patient of Shipman for about 19 years. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was bronchopneumonia.
Mr Saunders' death was one of those brought to the attention of the Greater Manchester Police, following the recovery of Mr Saunders' medical records from Shipman's home in September 1998.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the information contained in the cremation certificate, the death of Mr Saunders was not suspicious.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Rosina Abrams (a friend of Mr Saunders), Ms Yvonne Greer and Ms Esther Nightingale (both Registered General Nurses working at Hyde Nursing Home at the time of Mr Saunders' death). The Inquiry has had access to Mr Saunders' general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. Mr Saunders' file from Hyde Nursing Home has been obtained.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Saunders lived with his wife, Mrs Gladys Saunders, until May 1996. He had suffered a stroke in 1978. Then, in May 1996, he suffered a further stroke and, because his wife was unable to care for him at home, he moved to Hyde Nursing Home. In June 1996, Mrs Saunders died suddenly and unexpectedly; her death has been investigated by the Inquiry.
Mrs Abrams remembers that, soon after Christmas 1996, Mr Saunders 'seemed to go downhill'. He became ill with influenza and remained in bed.
The entry in Shipman's visits book for 8th
January 1997 records:
'Albert Saunders - very chesty - loose stools'
.
Ms Nightingale made the following entry in the nursing home's daily evaluation sheets on 8th
January 1997:
'8am
Appeared very chesty this am, frail pale and very
tired. Temp. taken 39°C Axilla. Had x 1 episode
of loose stools. Unable to eat anything this am.
G.P. visit requested. Appears cyanosed at
midday.
Visit
Fluids encouraged, but managed
to take sips. Visited by Dr Shipman 1.15pm. Fully
examined and diagnosed as having bronchopneumonia
Prescription given for flucloxacillin syrup.
Remains nursed in his bed today. Dr Shipman to
visit again tomorrow.
1.20pm
Family friend Rosina Abrams informed of Albert's
condition and will visit later'
.
Ms Nightingale has a vague recollection of Shipman's visit on 8th
January and says that she does not think he gave Mr Saunders an injection. She thinks that, if Shipman had given an injection, she would probably have recorded the fact in Mr Saunders' daily evaluation sheets.
The handwritten medical records show an entry for which the date has been altered. It was made on either 8th
or 9th
January 1997. It reads:
'Bronchopneumonia
Creps rhonchi A/E
both
(
illegible
)
Very poorly
Floxapen 25mg QDS'
.
This indicates that Mr Saunders had bronchopneumonia. Crepitations and rhonchi were heard in the lungs and air entry was reduced, probably on both sides. In the computerised records, there is a similar entry, dated 8th
January 1997, which records that Mr Saunders had influenza with bronchopneumonia. Floxapen, an antibiotic, was prescribed.
Mrs Abrams remembers visiting Mr Saunders at about 9pm on 8th
January 1997. This is confirmed by the daily evaluation sheets, which record her visit at 9.15pm. The entry in the notes records:
'visited by Rosina who may be contacted at
any time.
Breathing rapid'
.
At the time of the visit, Mr Saunders was in bed and Mrs Abrams had the impression that he had not eaten very much. He was quiet and, although Mrs Abrams spoke to him, she did not think he was listening. Overall, she formed the impression that Mr Saunders was 'tired of life' and was 'giving up'.
The Day of the Death
Ms Greer completed the daily evaluation sheets for 9th January 1997. The first entry at 8am reads
'condition remains poorly'
. Ms Greer has said that part of her responsibility, as staff nurse on duty, was to administer medication to the residents. At 10.10am, she made the following entry in the daily evaluation sheets:
'Attempted to administer
medicine to Albert.
He responded initially,
then slumped. On
examination he appeared
to have passed away.
Dr Shipman informed. To
attend later'
.
Ms Greer says that Mr Saunders was conscious when she gave him the medicine, which was in syrup form. He appeared to swallow it, then slumped back on to his pillow.
The next entry in the daily evaluation sheets was made at midday and records that Mr Saunders' next of kin had visited and had been informed of the
'absence of vital signs'
.
Mrs Abrams visited her daughter on the morning of 9th
January 1997. She recalls that her husband telephoned her at about 9.15am to tell her that Hyde Nursing Home had called to say that they should go there straight away. She went there and Shipman arrived soon after she arrived. The notes record that Shipman called at the nursing home at 12.10pm and certified the death.
Ms Greer says that she thinks it is very unlikely that Shipman visited Mr Saunders when he was alive on 9th
January, although she has said that there is a 'remote possibility' that he could have entered the building without being noticed.
The only entry in the medical records for 9th
January relates to Shipman's visit to certify the death.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). He certified the cause of death as bronchopneumonia. He said that the approximate interval between the onset of the final illness and death was three days. Hypertension had contributed to the death. Shipman said that he had last seen Mr Saunders alive on 8th
January 1997. He said that he had seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination. The MCCD is dated 9th
January 1997.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mr Saunders had died at 10.10am and that he had attended him during his last illness for a period of 24 hours. He said that he had last seen Mr Saunders alive 24 hours before he died and that he had seen the body about three hours after death. The cause of death was as stated on the MCCD. The mode of death was said to be coma lasting 12 hours. Shipman said that his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on statements made by the staff at Hyde Nursing Home. He said that the staff nurse on duty had been present at the moment of death. All these entries appear to be consistent with the facts as described by the witnesses and give rise to no cause for suspicion.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Baker considered the cremation certificate and concluded that the death of Mr Saunders was not suspicious.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mr Saunders died of natural causes as certified by Shipman.
Mr Saunders had had a stroke and was in poor health towards the end of his life. He appeared to develop influenza or a chest infection and then deteriorated. The description of his condition given by the witnesses is consistent with that of bronchopneumonia. The death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
There is no evidence that Shipman had access to Mr Saunders in the hours before his death. It appears that his last visit was on 8th
January. Although there is a theoretical possibility that Shipman could have entered Hyde Nursing Home unnoticed on the morning of 9th
January, there is no reason to suspect that he did or that, if he did, he did anything which caused or hastened Mr Saunders' death, such as administering a lethal dose of strong opiate. Ms Greer's description of his death is not typical of a death due to opiate poisoning. Nor is there any evidence to suggest that Shipman over-sedated Mr Saunders in a manner which might have increased his vulnerability to bronchopneumonia.
There is no reason to suspect that Shipman was unlawfully involved in Mr Saunders' death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001