The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Harriet Stopford
Introduction
Mrs Harriet Stopford died at Yew Trees Elderly Persons Home (known as Yew Trees), Yew Tree Lane, Dukinfield on Sunday, 20th
December 1992 at the age of 80. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She held him in very high regard. He certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia due to chronic obstructive airways disease.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the information contained in the cremation certificate, the death of Mrs Stopford was moderately suspicious. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Stopford's daughter, Mrs Grace Ann Eades.
An inquest into Mrs Stopford's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has obtained a further statement from Mrs Eades and has had access to Mrs Stopford's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. Unfortunately, the records kept by Yew Trees are no longer available.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Eades says that her mother had been at Yew Trees for about two months before she died. Mrs Stopford had Alzheimer's disease and could no longer be cared for at home by her husband. She had suffered a series of transient ischaemic attacks or mini strokes. She also had heart and chest problems, for which she took various forms of medication.
In the weeks before her death, Mrs Stopford became incontinent. Her weight fell to about five stones. She did not recognise her daughter.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
On Saturday, 19th
December 1992, Mrs Eades received a telephone call from the staff at Yew Trees to say that her mother was ill. She visited at about 5.30pm. Her mother was in bed and looked very ill. Mrs Eades had been at the home for about 20 minutes when Shipman arrived. He examined Mrs Stopford briefly and talked to Mrs Eades about whether Mrs Stopford should be admitted to hospital. He asked Mrs Eades what she wanted him to do. Mrs Eades said that she thought her mother 'had had enough'. Shipman then suggested that Mrs Stopford's medication should be terminated and that she should be given only water. Mrs Eades agreed. Shipman advised that Mrs Stopford would probably live until the following Monday.
The Day of the Death
Shipman visited Mrs Stopford the following morning, Sunday, 20th
December. Mrs Eades had brought her father to the home to see his wife and saw Shipman leaving as they arrived. Shipman told Mrs Eades that there was no change in Mrs Stopford's condition and that she was 'still sinking'. Mrs Eades stayed for about an hour that morning and then returned early that afternoon, with her daughter, for another hour. She left at about 2.30pm and went home. When she left, her mother was still alive and seemed to be slowly going into a coma.
About 30 to 45 minutes later, Shipman arrived at Mrs Eades' home to tell her that her mother had died. Shipman accompanied Mrs Eades to her father's home to give him the news.
Mrs Eades later spoke to the staff at the home. They explained that Mrs Stopford had died just as Mrs Eades was leaving the premises at about 2.30pm. They said that they had run out to try to stop her before she left but had just failed to do so. They had been present when she died. They did not say when Shipman arrived or who called him.
The Aftermath
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that the cause of death was bronchopneumonia due to chronic obstructive airways disease. He said that ischaemic heart disease and senile dementia were contributory causes, unrelated to the immediate cause of death.
Mrs Stopford was cremated. On cremation Form A, Mrs Eades said that her mother had died at 2.30pm which was correct. On cremation Form B, Shipman said that she had died at 3.30pm, which was probably inaccurate. He said that he had last seen her alive three to four hours before her death, which was probably accurate. He described her mode of death as coma lasting two days, which might have been accurate. He might also have been right to say that the matron was present at the time of the death and it was certainly correct to say that Mrs Stopford had been nursed during her final illness by the staff at Yew Trees.
Conclusion
Mrs Eades has never had any suspicion that Shipman was unlawfully involved in her mother's death. Whilst she was aware that he had withdrawn her mother's medication in order to let her die, she believed that this was the best thing for her mother. She did not wish to see her mother's suffering prolonged unnecessarily.
I have little doubt that Professor Baker was suspicious about this death because Shipman had visited Mrs Stopford so short a time before she died. When seen in context and when explained by Mrs Eades' evidence, however, there is no reason to have suspicion about this death.
I am quite satisfied that Shipman did not kill Mrs Stopford by lethal injection or by any other means. He appears to have involved Mrs Stopford's daughter in a sensitive discussion as to whether her mother's medication should be continued or withdrawn and Mrs Stopford's daughter seems to have been fully informed when she took the decision. Once her medication was withdrawn, Mrs Stopford died of natural causes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001