The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Margaret Smith
Introduction
Mrs Margaret Smith died at Norbury House, a residential home for the elderly, Great Norbury Street, Hyde on Tuesday, 21st
March 1989 at the age of 90. She had probably been a patient of Shipman for about nine months. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was dementia.
The Inquiry has a statement from Mrs Smith's daughter, Mrs Winifred Shaw, and from the former proprietor of Norbury House, Mrs Julia Anne Mackie.
The Inquiry has also had access to the Norbury House register of residents, Shipman's visits book for 1989, the cremation documentation and the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil. Mrs Smith's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Shaw recalls that her mother, who was widowed, generally enjoyed good health although she had cataracts and mild Alzheimer's disease. Mrs Smith moved into Norbury House on 25th
January 1988. The Norbury House register of residents contains the following entry relating to her admission:
'Admitted from home. - Senility. short term
memory - very poor. Daughter finding it very
difficult to cope...
Continent - Mobile - Appetite good'
.
Mrs Mackie recalls that Mrs Smith suffered from dementia and had a poor appetite. It was almost impossible to persuade her to eat and her health gradually deteriorated. Mrs Mackie recalls that, a few days before Mrs Smith died, she quite suddenly became very weak and stayed in bed. The register of residents contains the following entry:
'17.3.89
phoned Ken to say Margaret was not well.
DR Shipman seen her on Thursday and said he
would arrange another Geriatrician visit for
Monday 19th
or Tuesday 20th
'
.
According to Shipman's visits book, he visited Mrs Smith on Monday, 20th
March.
Mrs Shaw says that she and her husband, Kenneth, visited her mother at about 7.30pm on 20th
March. Mrs Smith was in bed in a semi-conscious state.
The Day of the Death
The register of residents contains the following further entry, made by Mrs Mackie:
'DR Shipman called Margaret passed away peacefully
10.40AM. 21.3.89'
.
This note suggests that Shipman visited Mrs Smith on the day of her death but before she died. However, Mrs Mackie has told the Inquiry that, by this entry, she meant that she 'called' or telephoned Shipman, after Mrs Smith had died. Mrs Mackie says that she was the only person present with Mrs Smith at the moment of death. She is certain that Shipman did not see Mrs Smith alive on the day of her death. The entry in Shipman's visits book would tend to support Mrs Mackie's recollection. Mrs Smith's name appears in the book for this date. There is a cross symbol before her name (signifying that she was dead) and after her name appears the time, 10.40am. There is other illegible writing alongside. I think this entry suggests that the visit request was made after the death and that Shipman was being asked to certify the fact of death.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that he had last seen Mrs Smith alive on the day before her death. He certified that the cause of death was dementia.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate, where he recorded that death had occurred at 10.40am on 21st
March 1989. He said that he had attended Mrs Smith during her last illness for a period of nine months and that he had last seen her alive 18 hours before her death. He said that he conducted a complete external examination of the body about two hours after death. The mode of death was said to be a coma of
'48 hrs or so'
in duration. Shipman recorded that his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and statements made by staff at the home. Shipman recorded that the matron at Norbury House was present at the moment of death. There is nothing in these entries to give rise to suspicion or concern.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered the cremation certificate in this case and concluded that the death was not suspicious.
Conclusion
I am satisfied that Mrs Smith died of natural causes. It is clear from the evidence of her daughter that Mrs Smith had lapsed into semi-consciousness the evening before her death. Whatever the precise cause of her death, it would appear that the death was not sudden or unexpected.
Apart from the ambiguous entry in the Norbury House register of residents, there is no evidence that Shipman saw or had access to Mrs Smith on the day of her death. Although this entry is ambiguous, Mrs Mackie says that the entry means that she summoned Shipman to see Mrs Smith's body after the death and had not asked him to visit her on that day while she was still alive. It would be unusual for Shipman to visit before 10.40am on a weekday. He would usually be busy in his surgery until about noon. It seems to me that I can discount the possibility that Shipman visited Mrs Smith while alive on 21st
March. I conclude that there is no cause to suspect that Shipman was in any way involved in this death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001