The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ruth Strickland
Introduction
Mrs Ruth Strickland died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Saturday, 2nd
December 1978 at the age of 84. It is not known whether, or for how long, she had been a patient of Shipman, who had been working in Hyde for about 14 months at the time of her death. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia.
The only information the Inquiry initially had about this death was the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), which named Ruth Phillips, as she then was, now Mrs Ruth Clement, Mrs Strickland's niece, as the informant. A letter was therefore written to Mrs Clement to see whether she could provide any information. Mrs Clement's daughter, Mrs Jean Edwards, replied on her mother's behalf, providing some useful information.
The Inquiry has taken a witness statement from Mrs Winifred Lanceley, who was a director of Charnley House in 1978. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Strickland's death certificate, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil and to the Charnley House admissions register and diary for 1978. Mrs Strickland's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Strickland was admitted to Charnley House on 24th
August 1978. Shipman first saw her on 30th
August, when he apparently arranged for her to have a hip x-ray. He also requested a urine sample. It is not clear why these investigations were thought necessary. On 19th
September, Mrs Strickland was to go to Ashton General Hospital, but the ambulance did not come for her and a new appointment was to be made. That day she was complaining of a sore back and bottom.
On 25th
September, Mrs Strickland had a stomach upset. On 30th
September, she was found on the floor in her bedroom when her breakfast was taken to her, but it was said that no harm had been done. There was a similar episode on 2nd
October.
On the evening of 8th
October, Mrs Strickland was said to be walking very badly at bedtime and was very confused. Shipman saw her on 10th
October 1978, when she apparently had diarrhoea. That night she was very sore. She was on a liquid diet.
On 13th
October, Mrs Strickland was not well at bedtime and was taken to her bed in her wheelchair. She had a burning sensation when passing urine. She was seen by Shipman the next day, but he said that he thought that she just liked to stay in bed. He gave her a thorough examination and said that she should get up the following day. The following morning, she refused food, drink and her tablet but had been out of bed to use her commode.
There are no further references to Mrs Strickland until 11th
November, which suggests that her health was not giving cause for concern or comment. On Saturday, 11th
November, Mrs Strickland fell out of bed, but again she did not seem to have come to any harm. On 14th
November, Shipman called to see Mrs Strickland and other residents, and left a prescription for her.
Mrs Strickland fell out of bed again on 21st
November, although again she did not seem to come to any harm.
Mrs Jean Edwards told the Inquiry that her parents visited Mrs Strickland about a week before she died. It seems likely that that would have been at the weekend of 25th
/26th
November. They had no particular concerns about Mrs Strickland at that time.
On 28th
November, it is recorded that Mrs Strickland was very sick at 8.15pm. She was put to bed, but vomited four times more. She was a little better the following morning, but again fell out of bed. The next night was also disturbed, and it is recorded that she felt worse. There is a record that the doctor saw Mrs Strickland on the morning of Thursday, 30th
November, and it is likely that this was Shipman. He left a prescription for her, and said that she should take a light diet and should get out of bed the following day. Mrs Strickland then passed a very disturbed night. She was awake, talking to herself and was very confused. She was also very chesty. She looked 'very poorly' in the morning.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of 2nd
December 1978, it is recorded that Mrs Strickland was taking food and that she should be given Complan. She was seen by Shipman, who prescribed penicillin. Mrs Lanceley made this entry at the end of her shift, which would have been at about 1pm.
After Mrs Lanceley had gone off duty, Miss Lynne Stansfield, a care worker, noted that Mrs Strickland was looking much worse that afternoon. She was breathing badly and did not seem to recognise Miss Stansfield. It is then recorded that she died at about 4.30pm and Dr Smith came, presumably to certify the fact of death.
Miss Stansfield says that she is quite sure that Shipman did not give any injection to Mrs Strickland on the morning of the day she died. She says that he must have visited at some time before 1pm, so he visited at least 3 hours before Mrs Strickland's death. She says that she would not have left Shipman alone with Mrs Strickland.
Certification
Shipman certified that the cause of Mrs Strickland's death was bronchopneumonia. On the MCCD counterfoil, he wrote that he had last seen her alive on the day of her death. He said that the death had not been referred to the coroner, and that she had been seen after death by another medical practitioner, and not by him. This is consistent with the Charnley House diary.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Strickland died of natural causes. Although she had been in poor health for some time, it appears she became very unwell on 28th
November. She was chesty and ill in the day or two before her death. This description is entirely consistent with the certified cause of death, bronchopneumonia. Shipman prescribed penicillin, which would have been appropriate in the circumstances.
There is no record that Shipman gave an injection on the day of Mrs Strickland's death. Whilst it is theoretically possible that he might have administered some medication which had the effect of suppressing the breathing of his elderly patient, or otherwise hastening her death, this is highly unlikely.
The fact of Mrs Strickland's death was certified by Dr Smith. It does not, therefore, seem likely that Shipman was on call on the afternoon of Saturday, 2nd
December 1978. Nor does it seem likely that he was with Mrs Strickland shortly before her death.
I am quite satisfied that there is no cause for concern about this death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001