The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Neville Shaw
Introduction
Mr Neville Shaw died at Tameside General Hospital on Tuesday, 27th
May 1986 at the age of 57. He was not registered as a patient of Shipman but with Dr Geoffrey Bills, who also practised from the Donneybrook Surgery. The death was referred to the coroner who, following a post-mortem examination without inquest, certified that the cause of death was myocardial infarction due to coronary atheroma.
In February 2001, Mr David Oldham, Mr Shaw's nephew, contacted the Greater Manchester Police to express his concern about his uncle's death. He said that his uncle had died suddenly in a psychiatric unit at Tameside General Hospital. He thought Shipman might have been involved. The police investigated the death but did not take any witness statements.
The Inquiry contacted Mr Oldham in August 2001. He still had some concerns about the death, although he was unable to give a detailed account of the events leading up to his uncle's death. He thought that Shipman had some connection with Mr Shaw at Brindle House, the mental health community centre in Hyde, which Mr Shaw attended for treatment.
Although it appeared unlikely that Shipman could have played a part in Mr Shaw's death, the death was investigated by the Inquiry in the hope that Mr Oldham's concerns could be allayed.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Derek Shaw, Mr Shaw's brother. It has also had access to the Greater Manchester Police Report of Sudden Death, the Report of Death to HM Coroner and the Post-Mortem Examination Report prepared following the post-mortem examination carried out on 28th
May 1986. The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1986 and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Shaw was divorced and lived with his mother. He was diagnosed as suffering from schizophrenia when he was only 21, and had spent several periods in a psychiatric hospital. Physically, he was very active and enjoyed long walks.
Although Mr Shaw was registered as a patient of Dr Bills, it is quite likely that he came into contact with Shipman at Brindle House. When living in the community, Mr Shaw would attend Brindle House monthly for an injection for the treatment of his schizophrenia. Mr Derek Shaw thinks that these injections were administered by Shipman and that this was the only contact his brother had with Shipman.
According to Mr Derek Shaw, his brother was admitted to Tameside General Hospital in October 1985 and remained there until his death seven months later, although he was discharged for a short time over Christmas 1985. The Report of Death to HM Coroner, which was compiled by reference to documents which are no longer available, suggests that Mr Shaw was admitted to a rehabilitation ward in February 1985 and was transferred to Ward 26B in February 1986. Since that time, his condition had deteriorated gradually.
The Events Leading up to Death
Mr Derek Shaw visited his brother on the evening of Monday, 26th
May. He recalls that his brother seemed mentally confused. Physically, he seemed much as he had done in recent months. Mr Derek Shaw had the impression that his brother had not been out of bed during that day. In the course of the conversation, Mr Shaw brought out his attaché case, took out some documents and repeatedly said the word 'cremation'. For some time, Mr Derek Shaw had thought that his brother would not live much longer.
At about 8am the next morning, Mr Derek Shaw was told of his brother's death by his sister, Mrs Margaret Bramhall, who had been informed by the hospital an hour before.
The Report of Sudden Death records that Mr Shaw died at 3.15am on 27th
May 1986 on Ward 26B at Tameside General Hospital.
As far as Mr Derek Shaw is aware, Shipman did not attend Tameside General Hospital during the evening of 26th
May or the early morning of 27th
May. As Mr Shaw was in a hospital, it is almost inconceivable that Shipman would have had any reason to see or treat him.
The Post-Mortem Examination
The post-mortem examination report records the following findings upon examination of the heart:
'The anterior descending branch of the left coronary
artery is severely constricted by atheroma 3cm from its
origin. There is extensive fibrosis and thinning of
the wall of the left ventricle anteriorly towards the
apex with formation of a cardiac aneurysm'
.
This is a significant physical finding. An aneurysm is a weakness in the wall of a blood vessel. The pathologist concluded that the cause of death was myocardial infarction due to coronary atheroma.
Conclusion
I am quite sure that Mr Shaw died a natural death. In the light of the publicity surrounding Shipman's activities, it is understandable that the families of patients who had been treated by Shipman should be anxious about the deaths of their loved ones, particularly where it is thought that Shipman used to administer injections to them.
I am able to reassure Mr Shaw's family. It is usual for patients suffering from schizophrenia to have periodic injections of antipsychotic medication while living in the community. It is quite likely that Shipman would have administered those injections to Mr Shaw at Brindle House. No concern need be felt about those injections, as Mr Shaw did not suffer any ill effect and lived for many months after he went into Tameside General Hospital, when his contact with Shipman would have ceased.
It appears that Mr Shaw's physical health declined during the last year of his life and his death was not unexpected. Although Mr Derek Shaw and Mr Oldham were not aware of the nature of any physical illness, it seems likely that Mr Shaw was suffering from heart disease. It appears that he had a fatal heart attack during the night of 26th
to 27th
May 1986. It is almost inconceivable that Shipman could have had any contact with Mr Shaw during the evening of 26th
May and the early morning of 27th
May. Tameside General Hospital has its own medical staff and does not depend on the services of local general practitioners. In any event, the physical findings on post-mortem examination were conclusive and there can be no doubt that Mr Shaw died as the result of a heart attack.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001