The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Leonard Shaw
Introduction
Mr Leonard Shaw died at his home, 3 Newton Hall Court, Hyde on Wednesday, 7th
January 1981 at the age of 85. He was a patient of Shipman, who at this time had been practising in Hyde for a little over three years. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Shaw's death was carcinoma of the stomach.
In December 2001, the Inquiry wrote to Mrs Florence Irene Littleford, Mr Shaw's daughter, who was the informant in relation to his death. Mrs Littleford did not reply and has since told a member of the Inquiry team that she is unwilling to provide an account of the circumstances of her father's death.
The Inquiry has no witness evidence. Mr Shaw's medical records have not survived. The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits books for 1980 and 1981.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Shaw was a retired Salvation Army officer. Little else is known of his personal background. His name appears in Shipman's visits book for 24th
December 1980 and 5th
January 1981.
The Day of the Death
The only information provided by Mrs Littleford was that she did not see her father on the day of his death and had not seen him for several weeks beforehand.
Mr Shaw's name appears in Shipman's visits book for 7th
January 1981. It is the first name on the list, which suggests either that Shipman knew in advance that he would visit Mr Shaw on that day or that a request for a visit was made quite early in the day.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not been recovered. However, its counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. There, Shipman recorded that he had last seen Mr Shaw alive on 6th
January 1981, although Mr Shaw's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for that date. He recorded that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that he had seen the body after death. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 7th
January 1981, the date of Mr Shaw's death.
Conclusion
On the available evidence, it is not possible to determine whether or not Shipman played a part in Mr Shaw's death. The fact that Mr Shaw's name appears in Shipman's visits book for the day of death might indicate that he was visited by Shipman. Equally, it is possible that Shipman visited Mr Shaw on 5th January and recorded an intention to revisit, but did not actually visit Mr Shaw while he was alive on the day of his death. Although there is no positive evidence to suggest that Shipman played any part in Mr Shaw's death, in the absence of witness evidence, the possibility cannot be discounted.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001