The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Dora Elizabeth Smith
Introduction
Mrs Dora Elizabeth Smith died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde in the early hours of Saturday, 25th
August 1979 at the age of 83. It is not known whether, or for how long, she had been a patient of Shipman, but at the time of her death he had been in practice in Hyde for almost two years. He certified that the cause of her death was right cerebrovascular accident.
The Inquiry has taken a witness statement from Mrs Smith's daughter, Mrs Madge Beetson, and has also had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, the Charnley House daily diary and admissions register, and Shipman's visits book for 1979. The medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
Mrs Smith was seriously injured in a road traffic accident in about 1968. She remained in hospital for about two years and was then discharged to her daughter's home in Chapel-en-le-Frith. Only a few weeks later, on 13th
August 1970, Mrs Smith was admitted to Charnley House, as her daughter, who had been looking after her, had to go into hospital.
There are few references to Mrs Smith in the daily diary for 1979. This suggests that she was in quite good health. On 21st
March, it is noted that Shipman left a prescription for her. The next entry relating to her is on 10th
August 1979, when it was noted that her leg was dressed. There is a similar entry for Wednesday, 15th
August 1979.
There is no further reference to Mrs Smith until the night report for Thursday, 23rd
August 1979, which probably reflects events of the early hours of the following morning. It is said that Mrs Smith was not too well, that she was lying in bed and would not speak, eat or drink. Later in the morning of Friday, 24th
August, the daily diary noted that Mrs Smith had had a cerebrovascular accident on the right side. Her medication had been stopped. Shipman had visited. Mrs Smith had been brought downstairs and had been given
'all nursing care'
. Later in the day, she was reported to be the same. In the evening, it was said that she was very poorly, and the night report recorded that Mrs Smith died at 2.45am, which would have been 25th
August.
Mrs Beetson remembers that her sister telephoned her on 24th
August to tell her that their mother had had a stroke. She went to the home where she was told that Shipman had been, although she was not told whether this was before or after the stroke. Mrs Smith was unconscious throughout Mrs Beetson's visit. Mrs Beetson stayed with her mother all evening and left at midnight to stay with her daughter. She was telephoned the next morning to be told that her mother had died during the night without having regained consciousness. There was no mention of any further visit by Shipman.
According to the visits book, Shipman saw Mrs Smith on Friday, 24th
August 1979 but there is no record that he visited her or Charnley House on Saturday, 25th
August 1979.
Certification
According to the death certificate, Shipman certified that the cause of Mrs Smith's death was right cerebrovascular accident. On the MCCD counterfoil, he confirmed that she had died on 25th
August 1979 at Charnley House, although he incorrectly stated that her age was 82. He said that he had last seen her on 24th
August 1979 and this is consistent with the daily diary. He said that he had seen Mrs Smith's body after her death and that there would be no post-mortem examination. He confirmed that the cause of death was right cerebrovascular accident.
Conclusion
The evidence suggests that Mrs Smith suffered a right-sided stroke or cerebrovascular accident in the early hours of Friday, 24th
August 1979. That morning, she was unable to eat or speak but is not described as unconscious. Shipman visited, probably in the late morning, which was his usual visiting time. It is not clear exactly when Mrs Smith became unconscious, although she was certainly unconscious from the time of Mrs Beetson's visit in the evening of 24th
August until her death in the early hours. The course of her decline over a period of 24 hours is entirely compatible with the development of a stroke followed by a natural death.
There is no evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Smith for a second time on 24th
August or in the early hours of 25th
August. It seems very unlikely that he would have visited during the night unless asked to do so by the staff and there is no record that they did. I therefore rule out the possibility that Shipman unlawfully killed Mrs Smith by administering a lethal dose of opiates, which directly caused her death.
There remains the possibility that Shipman gave Mrs Smith an injection on 24th
August, of some form of sedative drug, and that the dose was larger than was necessary or appropriate. This might have rendered Mrs Smith unconscious sooner and more deeply than would otherwise have been the case. If over-sedated, Mrs Smith would be more vulnerable to bronchopneumonia, a common mechanism of death in elderly people. Her death could have been hastened in this way. However, there is no evidence that Shipman gave any injection when he visited on 24th
August and, although I cannot absolutely rule out the possibility, I think it unlikely that he did. I would have expected a reference to it in the daily diary.
My conclusion is that it is highly likely that Mrs Smith died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001