The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Emmeline Swindells
Introduction
Mrs Emmeline Swindells died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Monday, 20th
April 1981 at the age of 86. It is not known whether, or for how long, she had been a patient of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was senility.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed an advertisement in a number of newspapers, publishing a list of cases in which the Inquiry had only very limited information as to the circumstances of the death and in which no relative had been traced. There was no response to that advertisement and the Inquiry has discovered that the informant named on the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), Mr Derek Norris, who was Mrs Swindells' nephew, has since died.
The Inquiry has had access to the death certificate, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, Shipman's visits book and the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
Mrs Swindells was admitted to Charnley House on 23rd
May 1980. The diary entries for the weeks leading up to her death reveal that she was very poorly. She was seen by Shipman on 6th
and 7th
April 1981, with symptoms of diarrhoea. There was concern to maintain her hydration levels and she was kept on a light diet and Dioralyte. It would seem that she was largely confined to bed because, on Friday, 10th
April, it was noted that she was to wear sheepskin pads on her elbows. This will have been to prevent pressure sores.
By Thursday, 16th
April, Mrs Swindells' condition seems to have deteriorated. She was unable to swallow and was only able to take a little nutrition. Her condition did not improve the next day and, on Sunday, 19th
April, she was plainly very poorly. On the afternoon of that day, an attempt was made to contact her nephew with no success.
Mrs Swindells vomited during the night of Sunday, 19th
April. Her condition deteriorated rapidly and she died at 5am on Monday, 20th
April. The diary entry for the morning of 20th
April records that a letter was to be sent to Shipman, presumably to inform him of the death. It is plain that he was not present at the home on 19th
or 20th
April and neither Mrs Swindells' own name nor Charnley House appears in Shipman's visits book. He is recorded to have been
'off'
on 20th
April, which was Easter Monday.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. Shipman completed it on Wednesday, 22nd
April. He confirmed the date, place and cause of death and said that he had last seen Mrs Swindells alive on 9th
April 1981. There is no documentary confirmation that Shipman saw Mrs Swindells on that day. It appears that the last time he saw her was on 7th
April. It seems likely that Shipman was careless in this respect when completing the MCCD.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Swindells died of natural causes. Her gradual deterioration is clearly documented in the Charnley House diary and there is no suggestion from any source that Shipman saw her in the days leading up to her death. Mrs Swindells died in the early hours of 20th
April, which was Easter Monday, a day when Shipman was apparently not at work.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001