The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Louisa Stocks
Introduction
Mrs Louisa Stocks died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Monday, 29th
March 1982 at the age of 80. She was a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was senility.
The only information that the Inquiry initially had about this death was the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') which named Eunice Jackson, Mrs Stocks' daughter, as the informant. A letter was therefore written to Mrs Jackson to see whether she could provide any information.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Jackson and Mrs Rita Liepins (Mrs Stocks' granddaughter and Mrs Jackson's niece). The Inquiry has also had access to the death certificate, the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), Shipman's visits book for 1982 and the admissions register and daily diary from Charnley House. Mrs Jackson has provided her personal diary for 1982. Mrs Stocks' medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
On 13th
September 1979, about two and a half years before she died, Mrs Stocks was admitted to Charnley House from the home of her daughter, Mrs Liepins' mother. She seems to have remained fairly well for some time.
On 14th
October 1981, Mrs Stocks suffered a bad fall. She sustained what is described in the daily diary as
'a very bad open wound on her left leg'
. She was taken to hospital where the wound was stitched. It did not heal normally and Mrs Stocks returned to the hospital on a number of occasions. The possibility of a skin graft was considered, but it is not clear whether that procedure ever took place.
The injury continued to cause trouble well into 1982. On 9th
February 1982, it is recorded in the Charnley House daily diary that Shipman visited Mrs Stocks and advised that she should have vitamin injections. The course of treatment began on 10th
February. A second injection was given on 17th
February. Shipman saw Mrs Stocks on 25th
February and was said to be pleased with her progress. There is no record in the daily diary to show that Mrs Stocks continued to have these injections. However, an entry in Mrs Jackson's personal diary for 5th
March reads:
'Visited Mother. Legs very sore after injections'
.
The Days Leading up to Death
The daily diary shows that Mrs Stocks became unwell shortly before her death. She was unsettled and could only take small amounts of fluid.
Mrs Jackson recalls that when she visited her mother on 26th
March, the matron told her that Mrs Stocks was refusing to eat or take her tablets. It appears that, when Mrs Stocks had first refused her tablets, the staff began putting her medication into her food. When she found out about that, she refused to eat.
On 27th
March, Mrs Jackson's sister went to visit Mrs Stocks. Mrs Liepins remembers accompanying her mother to Charnley House and seeing her grandmother very ill in bed. She was conscious but very quiet. Mrs Jackson remembers that her sister told her that the matron had said that Mrs Stocks would only last a few more days. Mrs Jackson's sister told the staff that they should not give her mother any more medication but should 'leave her in peace'. Her recollection is confirmed by the daily diary.
The Day of the Death
Neither Mrs Jackson nor Mrs Liepins saw Mrs Stocks on the day of her death. The morning report in the daily diary for Monday, 29th
March records that Shipman saw Mrs Stocks at some time before the end of the morning shift. Her name appears in Shipman's visits book for that day. Another daily diary entry records that all care was given and that 5ml of
'night sedation'
was left, presumably by Shipman, to be given if required. The afternoon report records that Mrs Stocks slept most of the afternoon. The evening report records that at 5.30pm medication was given to all of the residents, but there is no specific entry relating to Mrs Stocks. The final entry relating to Mrs Stocks records that she died peacefully at 7pm and that the doctor and her daughter had been informed.
Although Mrs Jackson did not see her mother on the day of her death and cannot provide direct evidence as to the circumstances of her death, the following entry appears in her diary for Monday, 29th
March 1982:
'Mother had a very restless night.
Alma phoned Mothers doctor to see if she
could get Mother sedated to ease her pain
and get some sleep.
Mother died this evening in her sleep
after her injection this afternoon'
.
Alma was Mrs Liepins' mother and Mrs Stocks' daughter. It may well be that her request for sedation led to Shipman leaving the dose of night sedation referred to in the daily diary. In her statement to the Inquiry, Mrs Jackson has said that, during the evening of 29th
March, her sister telephoned to inform her of the death. She said that Mrs Stocks died after receiving an injection in the afternoon
from a doctor
. There is no reference in the daily diary to Mrs Stocks receiving an injection or any medication at all. Yet it appears likely that she was given the 5ml of night sedation, as she slept all afternoon. Whether that was given orally or by injection and, if by injection, whether by the doctor or by nursing staff, is not clear. The giving of a sedative should have been noted by the member of staff writing the shift report.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD counterfoil on 29th
March. He stated that Mrs Stocks had died that day and that he had last seen her alive on the day of her death. That is consistent with the documentary material available.
Mrs Stocks was cremated but the cremation certificate has not survived.
Conclusion
Mrs Stocks' health had deteriorated in the days leading up to her death. She was very weak and probably dehydrated. Her death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
The daily diary shows that Shipman visited Mrs Stocks on the day of her death. We do not know at what time he visited but, as the visit is recorded in the morning report, I infer that he visited before 1pm. The daily diary suggests that Mrs Stocks died at about 7pm. If those entries are right and complete, there should be no reason to suspect that Shipman did anything directly to cause Mrs Stocks' death. A lethal dose of opiate would have resulted in death within the hour.
However, there are two causes for suspicion and concern. One is that Shipman was said to have left some night sedation for Mrs Stocks but there is no record, as there should have been, to show whether this was given. I suspect that it was, as Mrs Stocks slept all afternoon. Knowing Shipman, the 'night sedation' might well have been an opiate drug. If it was to be given orally, it might have been Oramorph. If it were to be given by injection, it could well have been morphine, pethidine, diamorphine or a sedative such as Largactil. We shall never know.
The second cause for concern is that Mrs Jackson was told that her mother died after an injection given by the doctor. As Shipman was Mrs Stocks' doctor, if a doctor did give her an injection, it was probably him. There is no record that Shipman attended a second time on 29th
March. However, there is every reason to think that he attended in the evening, as he certified the death on 29th
March and claimed that he had already seen the body. Yet that visit was not recorded in the daily diary which says only that the doctor was
'informed'
of the death. There remains a suspicion that Shipman paid a second visit to Mrs Stocks in the late afternoon or early evening, gave her a lethal injection and stayed at the home until he was
'informed'
of the death, which he then certified.
I do not feel able to reach a definite conclusion in this case. There are some indications that Mrs Stocks died a natural death. I have a suspicion (and it is no more than suspicion) that Shipman might have killed her. There is insufficient evidence to enable me to reach a conclusion. If Shipman did give Mrs Stocks an injection that hastened her death, I do not think it can have shortened her life by an appreciable period of time.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001