The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Alice Squirrell
Introduction
Mrs Alice Squirrell died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Thursday, 21st
January 1982 at the age of 81. She was probably a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was senility.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed advertisements in a number of newspapers, publishing a list of cases in which the Inquiry had only very limited information as to the circumstances of the death and in which no next of kin had been traced. Mr John K Squirrell, Mrs Squirrell's grandson, responded with helpful further information and has provided a witness statement. The Inquiry has also had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, Shipman's visits book and the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Squirrell was admitted to Charnley House on 3rd
January 1979 from her home in Denton. Mr Squirrell says that his grandmother had suffered two strokes about four years or more before her death and was treated in Tameside and Hyde Hospitals. She then lived at home for about 12 months before moving to Charnley House. Mr Squirrell says that, in the months before her death, her family was aware that she suffering from senility but, to their knowledge, she had suffered no other illness.
The Events Leading up to Death
The daily diary suggests that Mrs Squirrell was very poorly in the weeks before her death. In late December, it was thought that she had suffered a slight stroke, affecting her right side. She was nursed in bed. Shipman saw her on 7th
January and left a prescription, probably for Valium, as the daily diary for 10th
January records
'valium given at 10pm'
.
According to Shipman's visits book, he visited Charnley House on 12th
January. The daily diary for that day records:
'MRS SQUIRRELL: SEEN BY DR SHIPMAN. NOTHING CAN BE DONE. JUST A MATTER OF TIME'
.
On 16th
January, it appears that the staff were concerned and informed Mrs Squirrell's relatives about her condition. From 17th
January, the daily diary records a gradual deterioration until her death at 11.45am on Thursday, 21st
January 1982. Following the death, the relatives were informed and the daily diary records that
'Dr Kirarchynk'
(
sic
)
attended to confirm the fact of Mrs Squirrell's death at 2pm. Dr Kucharczyk was a partner of Shipman at the Donneybrook Surgery. Shipman's visits book does not suggest that he visited Charnley House that day.
Mr Squirrell says that, although his grandmother's death was unexpected, her family was not especially surprised, because of her advanced age.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD counterfoil on 22nd
January 1982. He stated, correctly, that Mrs Squirrell had died on 21st
January 1982, although he wrote that he had last seen her alive on 22nd
January, which was plainly impossible. This was probably a 'slip of the pen'. He probably intended to put 12th
January 1982, when he did see her.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Squirrell died a natural death. She was very poorly in the weeks and days leading up to her death. Her death was not sudden and was clearly expected by the staff. There is no evidence that Shipman gave or withdrew any treatment so as adversely to affect her condition. There is no evidence that he saw her on the day of her death. It is highly likely that he did not do so. Another doctor attended that afternoon to certify the fact of death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001