The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Elsie Scott
Introduction
Miss Elsie Scott died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 6th
October 1981 at the age of 86. It is not known whether or for how long she had been a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
Miss Scott's closest surviving relative is her niece, Miss Joan Scott, who has told the Inquiry that, before she died, her aunt was suffering from Alzheimer's disease. Miss Joan Scott was not with her aunt when she died and cannot say whether or not any member of the family was present. The Inquiry has taken a witness statement from Mrs Lilian Stansfield (a member of the Charnley House staff at the time).
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, the cremation certificate, Shipman's visits book for 1981 and the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville. Miss Scott's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
It would appear that Miss Scott was admitted to Charnley House from her home in Stalybridge on 24th
December 1979, almost two years before her death.
The Days Leading up to Death
On Saturday, 3rd
October 1981, it was noted in the daily diary that Miss Scott was
'IN AND OUT OF BED ALL NIGHT'
. No reason for this was given. On Sunday, 4th
October, Miss Scott took no food or drink and vomited on a number of occasions. She slept well that night but, on the morning of Monday, 5th
October, she was described, in a note written by Miss Stansfield, as being very ill. The note says that Shipman saw her and recommended complete bed rest. He said that she should be given only water and he would return that afternoon. The note does not mention any diagnosis or the administration of any injection or other treatment. Miss Scott's relatives were informed of her condition, which was obviously considered to be serious. Shipman returned that afternoon and was said to be quite pleased with Miss Scott's condition. He thought that if she continued improving she would recover. This implies that her condition had appeared earlier to be critical but had improved. Again, there is no reference to a diagnosis or to the administration of any drug. This note was made by Miss Bianka Pomfret, who worked at Charnley House for a short time. (She died on 10th
December 1997 and Shipman was later convicted of her murder.)
Miss Scott's name appears in Shipman's visits book for 5th
October. Below her name appear the words:
'C.T. Bed rest largactil 100mg IM'
. This would suggest that at one of his visits, probably the first, Shipman had diagnosed a coronary thrombosis, advised bed rest and given 100mg Largactil by intramuscular injection. Miss Stansfield says that she cannot remember whether Shipman did or did not diagnose a coronary thrombosis. Nor can she remember the giving of an injection.
In Shipman's visits book immediately below the entry relating to the intramuscular injection of Largactil, is a reference to a Miss Dunks. She too was a resident of Charnley House and a patient of Shipman. Against her name appear the words
'D/V Mr Bullough'
. In the daily diary immediately below the entry relating to Shipman advising that Miss Scott should have complete bed rest, is an entry saying that Miss Dunks was to be seen by Mr Buller (
sic
). It seems to me highly likely that the entry relating to the Largactil injection relates to Miss Scott and not to Miss Dunks.
Miss Stansfield recognises that the visits book suggests that Miss Scott received an injection of Largactil which is not recorded in the daily diary. She says that, had she been present when an injection was given, it would have been her usual practice to make a record in the diary. She says that it was usual for a member of staff to accompany a doctor while seeing a patient but sometimes the doctor would ask that something be fetched and the member of staff would then leave the doctor and patient alone for a few minutes. Miss Stansfield also says that if a resident who had had a heart attack was not too ill, she would expect the doctor to arrange admission to hospital but, if the patient was obviously very ill and would not benefit from hospital treatment, the patient would remain at the home, where he or she would be given 'tender loving care'.
Some confirmation that Miss Scott was given Largactil that day may come from the evening report in the daily diary for 5th
October, where it was noted that there was no change in her condition and she was
'still sleeping'
.
The night report for the early hours of Tuesday, 6th
October 1981, records that Miss Scott died at 3am. It is unclear whether she had woken since the previous entry had been made in the diary. It is not clear which doctor came to confirm the death but it appears that a doctor must have attended as the daily diary says that the necessary arrangements were attended to later that morning. It is possible that Shipman came, as Miss Scott's name appears in his visits book for that day.
It does, therefore, seem very probable that on 5th
October, Shipman diagnosed a coronary thrombosis, prescribed bed rest and gave an intramuscular injection of Largactil to Miss Scott.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. Shipman said that Miss Scott had died at Charnley House on 6th
October 1981. The cause of death was coronary thrombosis. He said he had last seen Miss Scott alive on 5th
October 1981, which is consistent with his visits book and the daily diary.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He confirmed that Miss Scott died at 3am on 6th
October 1981. He said that he had been her ordinary medical attendant for three years, which was probably inaccurate, unless he had previously been her doctor in Stalybridge. She did not move to Charnley House until December 1979. He said that he had attended Miss Scott during her last illness for 24 hours. That too is probably inaccurate, as it would suggest that he had visited her in the early hours of the morning on 5th
October, for which there is no supporting evidence. He said that he had last seen her alive 12 hours before her death. That was probably accurate, as Shipman's second visit on the afternoon of 5th
October would probably have been shortly before he returned to the surgery for his afternoon appointments. The cause of death was stated as on the MCCD counterfoil. The mode of death was a coma lasting 24 hours. Shipman said that his answers relating to mode and cause of death were based on his own observations. He said that Miss Scott was nursed during her last illness by the staff at Charnley House although he seems originally to have written that her son and daughters had nursed her. He said that no one was present at the moment of death and that Miss Scott's dead body was found during a routine check at 3am.
Dr Livingstone, a doctor at Clarendon House, completed Form C of the cremation certificate. In a rare departure from the customary practice of doctors in Hyde, Dr Livingstone spoke to a third party, in this instance a nurse at Charnley House. It is not clear what he was told but he was satisfied that the cause of death was indeed coronary thrombosis.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered the contents of the cremation certificate and did not find the death suspicious.
Dr Grenville says that the notes from Charnley House imply that Miss Scott was nauseous and unwell, possibly with a gastrointestinal upset. He notes that she was said to be very unwell on the morning of 5th
October. There was nothing to confirm Shipman's diagnosis of a coronary thrombosis. It is possible that Shipman diagnosed a heart attack because he did not take an adequate history or because that is the commonest cause of sudden deterioration in an elderly patient. If Miss Scott did suffer a heart attack, it may well have been reasonable not to admit her to hospital because of the upheaval and consequent dangers involved. However, Dr Grenville said that as a matter of good practice, the decision not to admit Miss Scott to hospital should have been discussed with her, her relatives or her carers. We do not know whether it was or was not discussed. Certainly there was no record of any such discussion in the daily diary.
Dr Grenville also says that it might have been appropriate for Shipman to administer an intramuscular dose of Largactil if Miss Scott was agitated. The appropriate dose would be in the order of 25mg. A dose of 100mg was excessive and would probably render Miss Scott unconscious for at least several hours and possibly a day or more. That would predispose her to the development of bronchopneumonia.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Shipman did not directly cause Miss Scott's death by injecting her with a lethal dose of opiate such as diamorphine. There is no evidence that he saw her within the last hour of so of her life. Indeed, it seems most unlikely that he did, as Miss Scott died in the early hours of the morning. Shipman did not usually turn out in the middle of the night. A deputising service was used. If Shipman gave Miss Scott an injection in the afternoon of 5th
February, it cannot have been a lethal dose. If it had been, she would have died within about an hour.
It appears likely that Shipman diagnosed a coronary thrombosis at his first visit of 5th
October. That probably took place in the late morning. In the absence of the medical records, I cannot say whether or not that diagnosis was well founded. I think it is likely that Shipman gave Miss Scott an injection of 100mg Largactil either then or possibly at his second visit, that afternoon. Whether or not any dose was justified, I do not know. The daily diary does not suggest that Miss Scott was in pain or distress, only that she was very poorly. Assuming that some Largactil was appropriate, it seems difficult to imagine how so large a dose could have been warranted. Shipman himself claimed that Miss Scott was in a coma for 24 hours before her death. If she was, a heavy dose of Largactil could not have been justified within that period.
If Shipman gave 100mg Largactil, as I think he probably did, I have to ask myself what he intended to achieve. It may be that Shipman believed that nothing could be done for Miss Scott and that he would make her final hours easier by giving her a substantial dose of Largactil. He might have thought that, if she continued to improve, she would become disturbed as she had been two nights earlier, and he wanted to avoid that. He might have intended to hasten her death by sedating her so heavily that she became more vulnerable to death by a respiratory illness such as bronchopneumonia. If he did so deliberately and wilfully, however, it is somewhat surprising that he should have recorded the overdose in his visits book. In any event, the generic evidence available to the Inquiry suggests that the response of any individual patient to an overdose of sedative is variable and unpredictable. Largactil would be an unlikely drug for Shipman to choose if his intention was to kill Miss Scott. It is possible, however, that he did not have an illicit supply of opiate at this time (or did not have any opiate with him) and used what was available.
I am unable to reach a decision in this case. There are too many uncertainties. I do not know whether Miss Scott had, in fact, had a heart attack on 5th
October or whether she might only have had an attack of gastroenteritis. It is possible that she was very ill indeed and the dose of Largactil had no effect on the length of Miss Scott's life. However, the dose seems to have been excessive and I suspect that Shipman took the decision to put Miss Scott to sleep for quite a long time and was reckless as to the consequences, and as to whether she lived or died.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001