The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Emma Smith
Introduction
Mrs Emma Smith died at her home, 13 Back Bower Lane, Hyde on Tuesday, 25th
August 1981 at the age of 85. She had been a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the left breast.
The only information which the Inquiry initially had about this death was the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), which named Mr James Henry Parker, Mrs Smith's son-in-law, as the informant.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Parker. The Inquiry has also had access to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil and Shipman's visits book for 1981. Mrs Smith's medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Parker describes his mother-in-law as 'a very strong woman'. She had, however, suffered from problems with her hips and until she underwent hip replacements in the 1970s, she was housebound. Mrs Marjorie Parker, Mrs Smith's daughter, would visit every day.
At some stage, Mrs Smith was diagnosed as suffering from breast cancer. She was admitted to Tameside General Hospital (or Ashton-under-Lyne Hospital as it then was) where she underwent a mastectomy. The cancer was malignant and, following her return home, Mrs Smith became very unwell. Mrs Parker and a home help cared for her. Mrs Parker slept at her mother's house every night for three months before the death.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
During the evening of Monday, 24th
August 1981, Shipman visited Mrs Smith. Mr Parker is unable to say at what time he arrived but he is sure that it was after he had eaten his evening meal at about 5pm. He is not sure how Shipman came to visit but thinks that he or his wife probably telephoned and asked him to attend.
Shipman went in to see Mrs Smith in her bedroom whilst Mr and Mrs Parker remained in another room. After about five to ten minutes Shipman came out of the bedroom and said, 'You'll sleep tonight'. He then left the house. At the time, Mr Parker understood that Shipman was saying that he had sedated Mrs Smith. Mr and Mrs Parker did not go in to see Mrs Smith, as they wanted to allow her to sleep. They both stayed at Mrs Smith's house that night.
The following morning, at some time before 8am, Mrs Parker went in to see her mother. When she came out, she told her husband that her mother was still asleep. Then, at about 8am, a neighbour came to the house and went into the bedroom. When she came out she said that she thought Mrs Smith was dead. She was right.
Mrs Smith's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for 24th
August, which is not surprising, as it appears that the evening visit was probably made as the result of a telephone call in the late afternoon or early evening. I have the impression that Shipman used his visits book as an aide-memoire for the routine visits he had to make during the day. Mrs Smith's name does appear in the visits book for 25th
August. This could indicate an intention to make a routine call, which would not in the event be necessary because Mrs Smith had died, or it might represent an intention to visit to examine the body and certify the fact of death.
Certification
The MCCD has not survived but the counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman said on the counterfoil that he had last seen Mrs Smith alive on 24th
August 1981, that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that he had seen the body after death. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 25th
August 1981.
Conclusion
It is clear that Mrs Smith was very ill and it appears likely that her death was imminent. I infer from Mr Parker's evidence that Mrs Smith was in pain and distress in the early evening of 24th
August. It appears that she had been unable to sleep. This is almost certainly why Shipman was summoned. In 1981, cancer patients often required periodic injections of opiate to control their pain. Syringe drivers were not then in general use. I think it likely that Shipman gave Mrs Smith an injection of opiate. If he gave this with the intention of relieving her pain and allowing her to sleep, that would be a wholly proper thing to do. If he deliberately gave her an excessive dose, intending to hasten her death, that would be unlawful. Shipman's remark to the family that they would be able to sleep that night does not provide any clue as to his intention.
It is not entirely clear to me at what time Mrs Smith died. Mr Parker says that, at some time before 8am on 25th
August, his wife went into the bedroom and reported that her mother was still asleep. Yet only a short time later, Mrs Smith was found to be dead. If Mrs Smith was still alive when her daughter went in to her, then there is no possibility that Shipman could have hastened Mrs Smith's death by giving a lethal dose of opiate. Had Shipman done that, Mrs Smith would have died within an hour of the injection. My only reservation about this case is that it seems possible to me that Mrs Parker might not have realised that her mother had already died when she went into the bedroom in the early morning. I can well imagine that, if Mrs Smith had been sleeping badly, Mrs Parker might have been anxious not to disturb her mother and might not have examined her closely. If Mrs Smith were already dead when her daughter went in, it is not known at what time she had died and the possibility that she died shortly after Shipman's visit would arise.
My conclusion is that this was probably a natural death but I cannot rule out the possibility that Mrs Smith died soon after Shipman's visit on 24th
August, in which case it is possible that he had hastened her death by injecting her with an opiate drug.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001