The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Margaret Sankey
Introduction
Mrs Margaret Sankey died at Norbury House, a residential home for the elderly, Great Norbury Street, Hyde on Monday, 1st
November 1993 at the age of 90. She had been a patient of Shipman since 1985. Mrs Sankey thought well of him and wanted to be seen only by him. He certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Julia Ann Mackie, the former owner and manager of Norbury House, and two statements from Ms Suzanne Ryan, whom Mrs Sankey had cared for as a child and who was working full-time as a care attendant at Norbury House at the time of Mrs Sankey's death.
The Inquiry has also had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs Sankey's death, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, practice documents from the Market Street Surgery, the Norbury House residents' register and Mrs Sankey's general practitioner and hospital records.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Sankey, who was a widow, was admitted to Norbury House from Tameside General Hospital on 30th
May 1985. Correspondence from the hospital (which mistakenly suggests that Mrs Sankey was discharged on 21st
May) reveals that she had been diagnosed as suffering from iron deficiency anaemia, vitamin B
12
deficiency, hiatus hernia, congestive cardiac failure, osteoarthritis of the left hip and possible osteomalacia. Mrs Sankey needed a Zimmer frame for walking.
In November 1985, Mrs Sankey was readmitted to Tameside General Hospital with a deep vein thrombosis (DVT) in the left leg and a suspected pulmonary embolus. It was at about this time that she registered as a patient of Shipman. In December 1985, she was reviewed at the hospital and complained of increasing breathlessness. Dr Jolobe thought that she had relapsed into congestive heart failure, although her condition improved at the beginning of the following year.
In November 1987, Mrs Sankey was diagnosed as having temporal arteritis, which is inflammation of the temporal artery and causes severe headaches. She was said to be mentally very alert. She was put on steroids and, although these relieved her headaches, she became increasingly breathless. She was admitted to hospital in January 1988 and remained there for about five weeks.
In September 1988, Shipman referred Mrs Sankey as an emergency to Tameside General Hospital, where she was found to have bile duct problems. She underwent surgery, following which she was found to have atrial fibrillation, which was successfully treated.
Mrs Mackie remembers Mrs Sankey's bile duct problems as they arose on the first day on which she started full-time work at Norbury House. She was very impressed by the speed with which Shipman (whom she had not previously met) arranged Mrs Sankey's admission. She recalls that Shipman continued to visit Mrs Sankey thereafter on a regular basis to check the medication she needed to prevent a recurrence of her DVT.
In July 1992, Mrs Sankey was readmitted to hospital for three weeks with iron deficiency due to large bowel disease. In November, she was admitted again with a purpuric rash on her foot.
The Events Leading up to Death
In the weeks leading up to Mrs Sankey's death, Shipman saw her with increasing frequency. On 17th
August 1993, a visit was requested because Mrs Sankey was said to be
'full of fluid'
, possibly because of congestive heart failure. Shipman's note of his visit suggests that her congestive heart failure was under control and that he would take a blood sample in September. The visits books suggest follow-up home visits on 3rd
and 7th
September but there are no corresponding entries in the medical records.
An entry in the visits book for Thursday, 23rd
September records a request for a visit because Mrs Sankey was having
'pains in chest/back'
. On this occasion, Shipman did make an entry in the handwritten notes. He prescribed Losec and Kolanticon, both of which are preparations for indigestion. He diagnosed
'reflux pain in back'
, suggesting that he thought that she had epigastric pain.
On Monday, 27th
September, Mrs Sankey was noted in the visits book to be no better and suffering a lot of pain. Shipman saw her again and diagnosed skeletal pain in the spine and left chest wall for which he prescribed paracetamol.
On 22nd
October 1993, there are further entries in the visits book suggesting that Mrs Sankey was in a lot of pain and that she, or someone on her behalf, was suggesting an x-ray of her spine. Shipman wrote in her general practitioner records that he gave her Co-dydramol. He also wrote Dr Jolobe's name, no doubt because he intended to request a domiciliary visit.
The Tameside General Hospital records show that Dr Jolobe carried out a domiciliary visit on Tuesday, 26th
October 1993. He noted that Mrs Sankey had multiple complaints, including breathlessness at rest and pain to her left breast and to the left side of her chest. In a letter dated 28th
October 1993, Dr Jolobe explained that in his view Mrs Sankey's pain was due to the side effects of long-term steroid treatment. He also referred to a recent x-ray that he understood had shown features suspicious of malignancy. The x-ray report, which was sent to Shipman, concluded that the radiographic appearances were
'now suggestive of a carcinoma affecting the right upper hilum'
.
The x-ray report was found within Mrs Sankey's medical records. Shipman entered in the 'Important Notes' summary card the words
'x-ray suggests Ca hilum'
. It should be noted, however, that these words are in brackets and it may be that Shipman entered them only after Mrs Sankey died.
Shipman saw Mrs Sankey on 28th
October 1993. The visits book suggests that she was very short of breath. Shipman made a note in connection with her heart medication, although it is not clear whether this reflected the existing medication or some intended change. It certainly does not reflect what Dr Jolobe wrote the same day in his letter from Tameside General Hospital. Shipman noted also, however, that he was to see Mrs Sankey again on Saturday, 30th
October 1993.
There is no reference in the practice visits book to the intended visit on 30th
October, although Mrs Sankey's name does appear in the book that Shipman took with him on his rounds. The medical record made on 30th
October contains a reference to the doubling of the dose of Innovace, which Mrs Sankey took for her heart. He recorded that she was
'very chesty'
and noted that he would review her on Monday, 1st
November 1993, the day on which she died.
Mrs Mackie recalls that Mrs Sankey seemed to realise a few days before she died that her death was imminent. She declined gradually over three days. Being a very religious lady, she was visited regularly by her priest, with whom she shared a glass of whisky.
Ms Ryan remembers that a priest attended to administer the last rites to Mrs Sankey on the day before she died. She did not understand why everyone seemed so sure that her death was imminent.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Mackie remembers that on the morning of Monday, 1st
November, she contacted the priest and Ms Ryan.
Ms Ryan recalls visiting Mrs Sankey on the day of her death, although she cannot now say at what time she arrived. She does not have a clear recollection of Mrs Sankey's condition but does recall her being conscious at times and thinks that she also managed to speak. Ms Ryan stayed with Mrs Sankey for 'at least a few hours' before she died. Ms Ryan's brother arrived some time in the evening after he had finished work. Mrs Sankey was able to speak to Ms Ryan's brother and, very shortly after that, she died. Ms Ryan says that Shipman did not visit Mrs Sankey while she was with her.
Shipman had noted on Saturday, 30th
October 1993 that he was to see Mrs Sankey again on Monday, 1st
November and her name appears as a revisit in the visits book for that day. There is no entry in the medical records for that day.
Mrs Mackie says that she spent some time with Mrs Sankey, who confirmed, as she had said before, that she was content to die as she had 'made peace with her priest'. Mrs Mackie says that either she or Ms Ryan was with Mrs Sankey all that day. She does not remember Shipman visiting Mrs Sankey on that day or in the few days before she died. She says that she expects that she would have asked him to see Mrs Sankey when she started to decline and that she would have told him that Mrs Sankey was ready to die and that there was no reason to involve him any further. This is not consistent with the picture revealed by the medical records and the practice documents. These suggest that Shipman was in regular contact with Mrs Sankey in the days before she died.
In the register of residents, Mrs Mackie wrote that Mrs Sankey
'passed peacefully away at 8.20pm'
.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On this, Shipman wrote that he had last seen Mrs Sankey alive on the day of her death. Next to the position in which he wrote that Mrs Sankey was 90 years of age at the time of her death, Shipman noted the time of death as
'20.20'
. He said that there was to be no post-mortem examination and that he had examined the body by the time of completing the MCCD counterfoil. He certified that the cause of death was bronchopneumonia, due to congestive heart failure, which was due to ischaemic heart disease.
Mrs Sankey was buried so there are no cremation documents.
The Expert Evidence
On considering Mrs Sankey's medical records, Professor Richard Baker thought that her death was not suspicious.
Conclusion
Mrs Sankey had been in very poor health for some time before her death. It appears that she sensed that she had not long to live and there is clear evidence that she had received the last rites while conscious. Shipman had noted that she was
'very chesty'
when he visited on 30th
October, and Mrs Mackie's description of Mrs Sankey's decline over the last three days of her life is typical of that seen in cases of bronchopneumonia. It seems to me that the death on 1st
November was neither sudden, unexpected nor inexplicable.
There is conflicting evidence about Shipman's attendance on the day of the death. His visits book and the medical record made on the previous Saturday suggest an intention to visit on the Monday. He claimed on the MCCD counterfoil that he had done so. Ms Ryan says that he did not visit while she was there and she can speak of a period lasting several hours before the death. She cannot exclude a visit before her arrival. Mrs Mackie says that Shipman did not visit that day. However, I do not think her recollection can be relied on, as she also says that he had not attended for several days and in that I am sure she is mistaken. I think it likely that Shipman did visit Mrs Sankey on the day of her death, probably in the late morning, as soon as surgery finished. I think this may well have been before Ms Ryan arrived.
Having said that, I do not think that Shipman's presence indicates that he did anything to hasten Mrs Sankey's death. She lived for several hours after the visit so I can rule out the possibility that he killed her by giving a lethal injection of opiate. She would have been dead within the hour if he had done. The other possibility is that he gave her an overdose of a sedative such as Largactil, which would have made her sleep very deeply and might have accelerated the progress of her bronchopneumonia. However, there is no evidence at all that he gave such an injection and the fact that she remained intermittently conscious until the end shows that it is most unlikely that she had been over-sedated.
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Sankey died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001