The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
May Slater
Introduction
Mrs May Slater died at her home, 30 Hough Lane, Hyde on Saturday, 18th
April 1981 at the age of 84. She was probably a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was congestive heart failure.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Catherine Slater (the widow of Mr James Slater, Mrs Slater's son), Mr Roy Slater (Mrs Slater's grandson) and Mrs Doreen Laithwaite (a former residential warden with responsibility for the sheltered accommodation at Hough Lane). The Inquiry has also had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil and Shipman's visits book for 1981. Mrs Slater's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Slater was a widow and lived alone in a bungalow which formed part of the Bradley Green Old People's Centre, Hough Lane, Hyde. This was sheltered accommodation, which had the benefit of supervision by a warden. Mrs Slater's bungalow faced the warden's flat, which was above the residential community centre. Mrs Laithwaite could see Mrs Slater's front door from her flat.
Mrs Catherine Slater says that she used to call on her mother-in-law two or three times a week. Mr Roy Slater says that he too used to call about twice a week. The back door was usually kept closed but unlocked for regular visitors, such as members of the family, although the front door was usually locked on a Yale lock.
Mrs Catherine Slater and Mr Roy Slater were both under the impression that Mrs Slater was registered as a patient of Dr Bills at the Donneybrook Surgery. They did not think that Shipman was her doctor.
Mrs Slater seemed to enjoy good health, although she occasionally complained of biliousness and dizzy spells. Her grandson describes her as a 'tough old bird' who was able to do all her own housework and shopping. None of the witnesses recalls symptoms suggestive of congestive heart failure, such as swollen ankles. Mrs Laithwaite remembers that Mrs Slater was quite lonely after her husband's death, although she remained sociable.
Mr Slater last saw his grandmother alive during the middle of the week before she died. He recalls that she had a cold but did not complain of feeling ill. Mrs Catherine Slater saw her at about the same time and she also remembers that her mother-in-law had a cold. Mrs Slater did not tell her family that she had called the doctor out or that she intended to do so.
Shipman's visits book shows that he visited Mrs Slater on 18th
March 1981. There is a note by her name that suggests that she had phlebitis in the right leg. Phlebitis is an inflammation of the veins of the legs and is usually associated with swelling of the legs. It is not a sign of congestive heart failure. Shipman appears to have visited again on 31st
March, although there is no note of the reason. He noted that he would see her again in seven days and appears to have visited again on 7th
April. I infer from these visits that Mrs Slater had some medical problem which warranted Shipman's visits and that the family has forgotten about it. This is not surprising after a lapse of 20 years.
The Day of the Death
At some time during the afternoon of Saturday, 18th
April 1981, Mrs Catherine Slater was at home when her husband, Mr James Slater, received a telephone call from Mrs Laithwaite, who said that his mother was not well and that the doctor had been called.
Mrs Slater did not have a telephone and if she needed the doctor, Mrs Laithwaite used to telephone the surgery on her behalf. Unfortunately, Mrs Laithwaite does not recall anything about the circumstances surrounding Mrs Slater's death. She does say, however, that she used to go off duty at 3pm on Saturday afternoons, so it seems likely that she first summoned a doctor before 3pm. She says that if she had asked a doctor to visit, she would not have gone off duty but would have waited for the doctor to come and would have accompanied him to the resident's bungalow. She would have waited there and would not have left the doctor alone with a resident.
Mrs Catherine Slater and her husband immediately walked to the Bradley Green Old People's Centre, which took about ten minutes, where they were met by Mr and Mrs Laithwaite. Mrs Catherine Slater remembers that Mrs Laithwaite told her that the doctor was with her mother-in-law. She cannot think why they did not go to the house, unless it was because they knew that the doctor was there. It is hard to see how that can be the explanation. A short while later a doctor walked over to the centre and told Mrs Laithwaite that Mrs Slater had died. He did not go into the centre and Mrs Catherine Slater saw him only through the window. She remembers that it was not Dr Bills, whom she knew. She can only say that the doctor was a short man, of about five feet four inches tall. In a supplemental statement she has said that he also had a beard and that he was not a lot taller than Mr Roy Slater, who is five feet six inches. These descriptions would fit Shipman, but his physical appearance is now well known and it is possible that Mrs Catherine Slater has given a description of Shipman rather than of the doctor whom she saw. The doctor then left and had no further contact with the family. The Slaters awaited the arrival of their son in the centre.
Mr Roy Slater called to visit his grandmother at about 4.40pm on his way home from work. It appears that he must have arrived after the doctor had left. He went in by the back door and went into his grandmother's bedroom. He saw her lying in bed beneath the bedclothes. She was wearing a cardigan or a housecoat with baggy sleeves. She looked ashen but appeared to be sleeping. He recalls that one of her arms was lying on top of the bed covers and felt cold. The sleeve was pushed up, but this was normal because Mrs Slater used to keep her handkerchief up her sleeve. Mr Slater left the bungalow intending to tell the warden what had happened, but as he went out he met his parents approaching the bungalow. He remembers being told that Mrs Laithwaite had called out the doctor because Mrs Slater was 'very ill'.
Mrs Slater's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for the day of her death. The visits book does, however, indicate that Shipman was off work from 15th
to 22nd
April inclusive, probably as this was Easter.
The identity of the doctor who visited on the afternoon of Saturday, 18th
April is something of a mystery. The Donneybrook doctors operated a rota system for out of hours duty. All the doctors worked on Saturday mornings but one doctor would have been on duty from Saturday lunchtime for the rest of the weekend. The doctor on duty would have the calls transferred to the deputising service at some stage, usually in the late evening, and would note the time of the transfer in the duty doctor transfer book. Unfortunately, the duty doctor transfer book for 1981 has not survived so I cannot discover which of the Donneybrook doctors was on duty that weekend. It could have been Shipman, although this seems unlikely if he was taking the whole week off work.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. Shipman stated that Mrs Slater had died at home on 18th
April 1981. He said that he had last seen Mrs Slater alive on 6th
April, although the visits book records a night visit on 7th
April. The cause of death was said to be congestive heart failure. Shipman said that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination. The counterfoil was dated 18th
April. This would suggest that Shipman was the duty doctor on call that day. However, it is possible that Shipman learned of the death on that day and came in to Hyde to see the body and deal with the formalities. The duty doctor who had seen her at the time of death may not have been in a position to certify the cause of death.
Conclusion
More than 20 years have passed since Mrs Slater died and the quality of the evidence has suffered as a result. No medical records survive and the only documentary evidence emanates from Shipman himself. It is therefore very difficult to be sure, for example, of the degree of congestive heart problems that Mrs Slater had, if any. She may have been a strong candidate for a sudden cardiac death but the evidence of her family and, to some extent, Mrs Laithwaite, would not suggest that she was. She was, however, being treated by Shipman for something, possibly phlebitis. The family recalls that Mrs Slater was unwell in the week leading up to her death, perhaps with a cold or mild chest infection.
It is not certain that the doctor who was called on the Saturday afternoon was Shipman. As he completed the MCCD counterfoil on 18th
April, I think it was probably he who answered the call. I cannot see why he would have come into the surgery on a Saturday afternoon or evening just for the purpose of completing the MCCD, when it would not be possible to register the death until after the weekend. Whether he came because he was the doctor on duty or whether he came to see his patient even though he was not on duty, I do not know. It is almost certain that Mrs Slater was registered with Shipman despite what her family remembers. If Shipman did answer the call, he completed the MCCD counterfoil on the basis that Mrs Slater was already dead when he arrived.
The question then arises as to why Shipman was called out. On this issue, Mrs Catherine Slater says that Mrs Laithwaite told the family at the time that she had called out the doctor because Mrs Slater was unwell. It is unlikely that they are mistaken about this and they would probably have remembered had they been told that she had been found dead. However, I have come across cases in which a warden has been reluctant to give the news of a death over the telephone and has asked the family to come to see her before going to the home of their elderly relative. It is possible that that is why Mr and Mrs James Slater went to see the warden rather then going straight to Mrs Slater's bungalow. It is, therefore, possible that Mrs Slater was dead before Mrs Laithwaite telephoned Mr and Mrs James Slater. It is also possible that Mrs Slater had been found dead and the doctor had been called out to confirm the death. It is possible that Mrs Laithwaite called the doctor because Mrs Slater was unwell and that seems more likely, as I do not think Mrs Laithwaite would have visited Mrs Slater at that time of day unless summoned, and would not have found her body until later. It is far more likely that Mrs Slater summoned Mrs Laithwaite by pulling her emergency cord and that Mrs Laithwaite decided to call the doctor. What is not known is whether she telephoned the family at the same time or waited until the doctor had arrived. If she was concerned about Mrs Slater, I think it likely that she would have telephoned Mr James Slater straight away. Mrs Catherine Slater gives the impression that when her husband received the call from Mrs Laithwaite, the doctor had been called but had not yet arrived.
The family arrived about ten minutes later, by which time the doctor was almost certainly with Mrs Slater. The family did not go straight to the bungalow but spoke to Mrs Laithwaite in the centre. I think this must have been either because Mrs Laithwaite had asked them to come to the centre rather than going straight to the bungalow or because Mrs Laithwaite kept a lookout for them to prevent them from going straight to the bungalow. Whichever it was, I think the explanation must be that by that time Mrs Laithwaite knew that Mrs Slater was either dead or dying. I think what must have happened is that when the doctor arrived, Mrs Laithwaite took him in and stayed while he examined Mrs Slater. It would then appear that the doctor told Mrs Laithwaite either to go to telephone the family or possibly to go to intercept the family's arrival. If that had happened and if Mrs Slater had then died in the doctor's presence and the doctor was Shipman, I would be very suspicious that Shipman had caused the death. According to Mrs Catherine Slater, the doctor gave Mrs Laithwaite the news of the death. If that is right, it seems likely that the doctor had told Mrs Laithwaite that Mrs Slater was seriously ill and close to death and that he told her of the death when he came out. He did not speak to Mr and Mrs James Slater but he might not have realised that they had arrived because they had not come by car.
I have not found this case easy to decide. I have some doubt as to whether the doctor was Shipman. However, I have come to the conclusion that he probably was. Although it is possible that Mrs Slater was already dead when Shipman arrived, I think on balance that it is more likely that she was not. Had she been dead, I think Mrs Laithwaite would probably have told the family over the telephone. I think it is more likely that Mrs Laithwaite called out Shipman because Mrs Slater was ill.
It appears likely, therefore, that Mrs Slater died in Shipman's presence. It is possible that she could have died of natural causes in his presence but knowing, as I do, that Shipman had already killed a number of patients and was later to kill many more, I have come to the conclusion that he killed Mrs Slater. I could not say that I am sure of this conclusion but I think that it is probable.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001