The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Albert Slater
Introduction
Mr Albert Slater died at his home, 10 Newton Hall Court, Hyde on Thursday, 11th
January 1979 at the age of 79. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was coronary thrombosis.
In October 2001, Mr Samuel Slater, Mr Slater's son, contacted the Inquiry expressing concern as to the circumstances of his father's death. The Inquiry has investigated the death and has taken a statement from Mr Samuel Slater. Mr Alfred Slater, another son, has provided the Inquiry with a brief account of the treatment Shipman gave his father, but he has been unable to describe the circumstances of his father's death. The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1979, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil and the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'). Mr Slater's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Slater worked as a general labourer for most of his life. At the time of his death, he lived with his wife and his daughter, Miss Lena Slater, whose death has also been investigated by the Inquiry.
Mr Slater had smoked for most of his life, although he stopped some time before he died. He had a bout of bronchitis about once a year. Mr Samuel Slater was not aware that his father had any heart trouble and thinks his father would have mentioned such a condition.
Mr Slater was well on Christmas Day 1978. On Boxing Day, however, he started to feel unwell and retired to bed, where he remained until his death more than two weeks later. His name appears in Shipman's visits book on Wednesday, 3rd
January 1979, Friday, 5th
January 1979, Tuesday, 9th
January 1979 and Wednesday, 10th
January 1979. Mr Samuel Slater is aware of the visit of 10th
January 1979, but not of the earlier ones.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
Mr Samuel Slater recalls that his sister telephoned him just before teatime on Wednesday, 10th
January 1979. She said that the doctor was coming to see their father, as he was still unwell. Mr Samuel Slater went to his father's flat, arriving at about 5.20pm. He found his father in bed, sitting upright, propped up by pillows. He sat at the foot of his father's bed and chatted to him. His recollection is that his father had 'a bit of a cough', but he did not appear to be 'gravely ill'. Whilst Mr Samuel Slater was sitting on the bed, his father said that 'he did not want any injection and would prefer to receive tablets'.
Shipman arrived at some time between 5.30pm and 5.40pm. According to Mr Samuel Slater, Shipman sat on the bed and took out a hypodermic needle from the black bag he had brought with him. Mr Slater drew back from Shipman as he took out the needle and Shipman said in a rather angry tone: 'What's the matter with you? I haven't touched you yet'. Mr Samuel Slater felt that the comment was both abrupt and inappropriate. Shipman then gave Mr Slater an injection in his right arm and said that he would 'now be comfortable'. Mr Samuel Slater does not know whether Shipman had given injections to his father prior to 10
t
h January. Mr Alfred Slater says that Shipman had given his father a series of injections and it appears likely that that was the case, as even before Shipman had arrived on 10th
January, Mr Slater had told his son Samuel that he did not want an injection. That would suggest that Shipman had given Mr Slater injections on previous days and Mr Slater found them painful or in some other way unacceptable.
Mr Samuel Slater says that, so far as he recalls, his father was not in pain either on 10th
January or on the preceding days. He had breathing problems. Shipman's comment that Mr Slater would be more comfortable after his injection might suggest that he was in pain, although it is equally possible that Shipman was saying that the injection would help him to breathe more easily.
Mr Samuel Slater says that, about 10 to 15 minutes after Shipman had given the injection, Mr Slater told his son that he was feeling tired and wanted to sleep. Mr Samuel Slater left the room and ate his evening meal with his mother and sister. Some time later, Mrs Slater went to look at her husband and reported that she could not hear him breathing. Mr Samuel Slater went into his father's room and saw him lying on the bed looking 'quite peaceful as though he was asleep'. However, he seems to have felt that something was wrong, as he telephoned the Donneybrook Surgery 'emergency number' which Shipman had given to the Slaters. A duty doctor, not one of the Donneybrook doctors, came to the flat and declared that Mr Slater was dead. He gave the family a completed form, with instructions to hand it to Shipman. I think it highly likely that that form would have recorded the time at which the doctor had pronounced Mr Slater dead.
In his first statement, Mr Samuel Slater said that he thought the period between Shipman's giving his father an injection and the discovery of the death was about an hour. However, he has now considered the point further and says that it is possible that the period between the injection and death may have been much longer than one hour. He now says that it is possible that his father died in the early hours of 11th
January 1979. The fact that a deputising doctor came to the house suggests that the death occurred either very late at night or in the early hours of the next morning, as it was usual practice for the Donneybrook doctor on duty in the evening to deal with calls up to 11pm. Further, Shipman was to record on the MCCD counterfoil that Mr Slater died on 11th
January 1979.
The Aftermath
The following day, Mr Samuel Slater's sister took the duty doctor's form to the surgery and gave it to Shipman. According to Mr Samuel Slater, Shipman told her that he had diagnosed Mr Slater as suffering from angina some time before. This surprised Mr Samuel Slater because his father had never mentioned this and he felt it was uncharacteristic of his father not to mention such a matter.
Certification
The MCCD has not survived but the counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman said that he had last seen Mr Slater alive on 10th
January 1979, that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that he had seen the body after death. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 11th
January 1979.
Mr Samuel Slater is named as the informant on Mr Slater's death certificate and is said to have been present at his father's death.
Conclusion
Mr Slater was clearly unwell in the weeks before his death, and might have been more unwell than Mr Samuel Slater recalls. Given the passage of time, that would be perfectly understandable. That Mr Slater was confined to bed for two weeks and had been visited by Shipman several times, would suggest that he was quite seriously unwell, although not apparently suffering from a condition which Shipman thought should be treated in hospital.
In the absence of the medical records, it is difficult to know what Mr Slater was suffering from. I have the impression that the underlying illness was connected with his lungs, possibly a chest infection. If that were so, it seems likely that Shipman had been giving Mr Slater a series of antibiotic injections. It is possible that Mr Slater had developed heart failure and that this was the cause of his breathing difficulties. It might then be that Shipman gave a diuretic in an attempt to remove fluid from the lungs. However, that seems unlikely, as such injections are not usually given in the evening, as the patient is unable to sleep because of the frequency with which he or she urinates. It is unclear whether Mr Slater had suffered from angina as Shipman claimed. In any event, there does not seem to be any history from which Shipman could have diagnosed that the cause of death was a heart attack.
Some suspicion arises in this case because Shipman attended at the house on 10th
January 1979 and administered an injection to Mr Slater. That injection might have been an antibiotic, which could have done no harm to Mr Slater and might have done some good. There is no real reason to suspect that that injection was of an opiate, although suspicion that it might have been always arises, on account of Shipman's practice of killing patients by that method. However, it seems unlikely that Shipman could have caused Mr Slater's death directly by giving a lethal injection of opiate. I am satisfied that Mr Slater lived for several hours after the injection and, as Professor Henry McQuay has said, a lethal dose of opiate will kill within an hour of administration. It is possible, however, that Shipman gave a fairly small dose of opiate or other sedative, which would have impaired Mr Slater's respiratory function even more than it was already impaired. It is possible that Shipman gave an inappropriate injection with the intention of hastening Mr Slater's death.
My main cause for concern, in this case, is that Shipman certified that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis, although there does not appear to be any history of such an event. In later years, Shipman frequently certified a death as due to coronary thrombosis when he had in fact killed the patient. I think Mr Slater may have had bronchopneumonia or have been in respiratory failure and I can see a possible method by which Shipman could have hastened his death from that cause. But why, if he did that, Shipman would want to certify the death as due to coronary thrombosis I cannot imagine.
I do not feel able to reach any conclusion as to whether Mr Slater's death was due to natural causes or whether Shipman hastened his end.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001