The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Florence Slater
Introduction
Mrs Florence Slater died at her home, 10 Newton Hall Court, Hyde on Saturday, 6th
February 1982 at the age of 88. She was a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was senility.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Slater's son, Mr Alfred Slater. The Inquiry has also had access to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil and Shipman's visits book for the relevant period. Mrs Slater's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
Very little is known about Mrs Slater's personal background. She was the widow of Mr Albert Slater, a general labourer. Her son has told the Inquiry that she fell into a coma about a week before she died. She had not been eating well for some time and had become very frail. She was nursed by her daughters, Miss Lena Norah Slater, whose death has also been investigated by the Inquiry, and Mrs Elizabeth Foy.
Mr Slater last saw his mother alive on the day before her death. She did not appear to be conscious and her breathing was heavy. Mr Slater was told by his sister, Miss Slater, that his mother had been waiting for him. Mr Slater thinks that his sister meant that their mother wanted to see him before she died.
Mr Slater does not recall the means by which he received the news of his mother's death. He has no recollection of what he was told about the time of death or the circumstances surrounding it other than that Miss Slater was with their mother at the moment of death. He was not surprised by the news of his mother's death, as he regarded it as inevitable.
Shipman's visits book shows that he was due to visit Mrs Slater on 26th
, 27th
, 29th
and 30th
January and on 1st
, 2nd
and 4th
February 1982. Her name is also recorded in the visits book on 6th
February, the day of her death.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that he had last seen Mrs Slater alive on 6th
February, the day of her death. He said that the death was due to senility and that congestive heart failure had contributed to the death. He said that he had seen the body after death and that there would be no post-mortem examination.
Conclusion
The evidence in this case is extremely limited. However, it seems clear that Mrs Slater was in a very frail condition and probably became unconscious in the week leading up to her death. The visits book suggests that she was also receiving a high degree of medical attention at this time.
Unfortunately, however, very little is known about the circumstances surrounding Mrs Slater's death. It seems likely that Shipman saw Mrs Slater alive on the day of her death. It follows that there is a possibility that he administered a drug that hastened her death. On the other hand, it is clear that her death was neither sudden nor unexpected. It would seem unlikely that Shipman would kill an unconscious patient. Although I cannot rule out the possibility that Shipman hastened Mrs Slater's death, I think it far more likely that her death was natural.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001