The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Kate Elizabeth Stafford
Introduction
Mrs Kate Elizabeth Stafford died at Pole Bank Hall Residential Care Home, Stockport Road, Hyde on Wednesday, 17th
February 1988 at the age of 93. She had probably been a patient of Shipman for about 18 months. Shipman certified the cause of her death to be senility.
The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for the relevant period, the cremation documentation and the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Mrs Freda Katherine Hibbs, one of Mrs Stafford's daughters, has confirmed the accuracy of the contents of the cremation certificate and has also provided a short statement. There are no nursing records from Pole Bank Hall and Mrs Stafford's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Stafford was a widow. One of her daughters, Mrs Joyce Woodhead, who was the informant in relation to the certification of her death, was killed by Shipman on 23rd
February 1997.
The Evidence
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that Mrs Stafford died on 17th
February 1988 and that he had last seen her alive on the previous day.
On Form B of the cremation certificate, Shipman stated that Mrs Stafford died at approximately
'12.55'
on 17th
February 1988. He said that he had last seen her alive on 16th
February, about 24 hours before the death. He said that he saw the body about three hours after the death. The mode of death was said to be a coma of two to three days in duration. Shipman stated that Mrs Stafford's daughters were present at the moment of her death. By implication, he himself was not present.
Mrs Stafford's name appears in Shipman's visits book on 13th
February, 16th
February and 17th
February 1988.
Mrs Hibbs has told the Inquiry that the contents of Form B are accurate, so far as she can remember. However, she cannot recall when her mother became unconscious. I am able to infer that she was present at her mother's death and that Shipman was not.
The Expert Evidence
After considering the cremation documents, Professor Richard Baker classified Mrs Stafford's death as not suspicious.
Conclusion
There is no evidence that Shipman saw Mrs Stafford in the hours before her death and I can therefore rule out the possibility that Shipman unlawfully killed her by administering a lethal dose of an opiate, which directly caused her death. However, I cannot rule out the possibility that Shipman might have given Mrs Stafford quite large doses of a sedative over a period of four to five days with the intention of keeping her asleep. If she was sedated, Mrs Stafford would be vulnerable to bronchopneumonia, a common mechanism of death in elderly people. If Shipman did this, it would not be possible to say whether he had done it with the intention of keeping Mrs Stafford comfortable or whether he used it as an indirect way of hastening her death. I stress that there is no positive evidence to suggest that Shipman did over-sedate Mrs Stafford. My conclusion is that it is very likely that Mrs Stafford's death was entirely natural.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001