The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Edna Shawcross
Introduction
Miss Edna Shawcross died at her home, 105 Stockport Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 8th
January 1985 at the age of 66. She was a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was cachexia due to carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the rectum.
In September 2001, the Inquiry wrote to Mrs Joan Sellars, Miss Shawcross' niece, seeking information about the death. Mrs Sellars had already provided a witness statement to the Inquiry in connection with Miss Shawcross' sister, Miss Mabel Shawcross, who had been killed by Shipman in 1998. Mrs Sellars was unable to provide detailed information relating to the death of Miss Edna Shawcross but told the Inquiry that her aunt was very ill and bedridden at the time of her death, which she believed to have been caused by cancer. She had been nursed at home by her sister, Mabel, with whom she lived.
The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits books for the relevant period, the cremation documentation, the duty doctor transfer diary and the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD).
This decision has been written following consideration of the documents and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
Miss Shawcross' name does not appear in Shipman's visits book in the weeks before her death. It last appears on 1st
December 1984.
Shipman completed the MCCD counterfoil on the day of death. He said that he had last seen Miss Shawcross alive on the day before her death. He mistakenly recorded that she was 69 years old. He stated that cancer of the rectum causing carcinomatosis and cachexia had caused the death. Carcinomatosis implies that the cancer spread throughout the body and cachexia connotes the general wasting away that would be expected with such widespread disease. He said that he had seen the body after death and that there was to be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate and recorded that Miss Shawcross died at 2.15am on 8th
January 1985 in the presence of her sister. Shipman recorded that he last saw Miss Shawcross alive eight hours before her death (i.e. at 6.15pm on 7th
January), which is consistent with the entry made on the MCCD counterfoil. He confirmed the three causes of death entered on the MCCD. He said that the mode of death was coma lasting 10 to 12 hours. His views as to mode and cause of death were said to be based on his own observations and statements made by Miss Shawcross' sister. Miss Shawcross had been nursed by her sister, who was said to have been present at the death. In response to the question asking whether any pacemaker or radioactive material had been inserted into the body, Shipman said that it had. When asked whether it had been removed, he said that the question was not applicable. Mrs Sellars was unsure about the meaning of this but it seems most likely that Shipman was referring to radiotherapy treatment (the insertion into the pelvic cavity of radioactive material) that Miss Shawcross may well have undergone for her cancer.
Miss Mabel Shawcross completed Form A, the application for cremation, but the date and time of death are not entered.
The duty doctor transfer diary reveals that Shipman was not on duty after surgery hours on the evening of 7th
January 1985. If he visited Miss Shawcross at about 6.15pm, therefore, he probably did so on his way home from the surgery.
Conclusion
Miss Shawcross was very ill with cancer and the evidence suggests that her sister nursed her during her last illness. It is surprising that Shipman does not appear to have visited Miss Shawcross regularly during the last few days of her life. However, it may be that he did but did not enter her name in his visits book. It is possible that the district nurse was primarily responsible for the provision of pain-relieving medication.
If Shipman accurately recorded that he had last seen Miss Shawcross alive eight hours before her death, he cannot have directly caused her death. If, as seems quite possible, Shipman was on occasions giving pain-relieving drugs to Miss Shawcross, any dose that he could have given at about 6pm on 7th
January would have long since reached and passed its point of maximal effect by the time of her death.
It is possible but unlikely that Shipman was called out in the early hours of the morning of 8th
January. He was not on duty. It is possible that he gave Miss Mabel Shawcross his home telephone number and advised her to telephone him if she needed further assistance. If he did visit in the early hours, it is possible that he gave Miss Shawcross an excessive dose of opiate which caused or hastened her death. However, it seems far more likely that he visited in the early evening and did not see Miss Shawcross alive again.
Although I cannot rule out the possibility that Shipman hastened Miss Shawcross' death, I think it is far more likely that she died a natural death of the causes certified by Shipman.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001