The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Robert Swann
Introduction
Mr Robert Swann died at his home, 57 Great Norbury Street, Hyde on Monday, 29th
September 1980 at the age of 92. He was a patient of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was carcinomatosis due to cancer of the stomach.
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and Shipman's visits book for 1980.
Despite extensive efforts by the Inquiry, no witnesses have been traced who have any knowledge of the circumstances of Mr Swann's death. Mr Barry Swann, Mr Robert Swann's grandson, has assisted the Inquiry in connection with his mother's death but cannot help in respect of his grandfather.
The Evidence
Shipman's visits book shows that he visited Mr Swann on Wednesday, 17th
September, Tuesday, 23rd
September and Saturday, 27th
September.
The informant named on the death certificate, Mrs Martha Marley, who was Mr Robert Swann's daughter, died in 1998 and was one of Shipman's victims. The death certificate says that she was present at the moment of her father's death.
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. The certificate itself has not survived but the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that he had last seen Mr Swann alive on 27th
September 1980, two days before his death. As I have said, Mr Swann's name appears in Shipman's visits book on that day. It does not appear in the visits book for Monday, 29th
September.
Conclusion
I regret that I am unable to reach a positive conclusion in this case. There is insufficient evidence. Such evidence as there is suggests that the death was natural. Mr Swann was in need of periodic visits by Shipman. His daughter was with him at the death. However, there is so little information that I feel unable to say, even on the balance of probabilities, whether the death was due to natural causes or might have been caused by Shipman.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001