The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Susan Eveline Shaw
Introduction
Mrs Susan Eveline Shaw died at The Sycamores, a residential home for the elderly, Victoria Street, Hyde on Monday, 21st
September 1987 at the age of 81. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was carcinoma of the stomach.
The Inquiry has obtained statements from Mrs Patricia Marro, Mrs Joan Williams, Mrs Marion Rowbotham and Mrs Nora Smythe (care assistants employed at the home) and from Mrs Susan Chadwick (the former deputy manager at the home). The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Shaw's general practitioner records, which were recovered by the police from Shipman's home, and to Shipman's visits book for 1987, the duty doctor transfer book, the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Shaw was a widow and, until about April 1984, lived independently in a flat in Newton Hall Road, Hyde. She had been a member of the Salvation Army. In 1976, she had a stroke, from which she made a good physical recovery, although at some stage she began to show signs of confusion. She remained in her own home with support from her daughter (who lived in Denton), a home help, meals on wheels and neighbours. She had a second stroke in 1982 followed by a third in February 1984. In April 1984, following a domiciliary visit, Dr H H Wan, consultant physician in geriatric medicine at Tameside General Hospital, found that she was suffering from dementia and mild cardiac failure and suggested that she be admitted to an elderly persons' home. She was admitted to The Sycamores soon afterwards. She seems to have remained quite well after admission, although the medical summary card records that she had a stroke in 1986.
The general practitioner records suggest that, in May 1987, Mrs Shaw had an episode of acute breathlessness, which was attributed to left ventricular failure. Shipman treated her for this and she recovered, although there seems to have been some recurrence in August 1987. Then, on 9th
September, Shipman recorded that she had an abdominal swelling and he suspected that this might be due to cancer. It does not appear that any investigation was carried out. A week later, on 15th
September, he noted that she had lost weight. According to the medical records, that was the last occasion on which Shipman saw Mrs Shaw before her death. Members of staff from The Sycamores recall that, shortly before her death, Mrs Shaw had bowel problems that would be consistent with the cause of death that Shipman was to certify.
The Death
Mrs Chadwick recalls that Mrs Shaw's health deteriorated rapidly before she died. She recalls sitting with her shortly before her death. By this stage, Mrs Shaw was in a coma. She did not appear to be in pain or distress. Her death was expected. The next time Mrs Chadwick was on duty she was told that Mrs Shaw had died.
The medical record envelope contains an attendance note from a deputising doctor who attended at The Sycamores at 8.55pm on 21st
September 1987 and declared that Mrs Shaw had died at 7.55pm. Mrs Shaw's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for the day of her death, and the duty doctor transfer book reveals that Dr Derek Carroll was on duty until 7.20pm when he handed over to the duty doctor.
None of the witnesses interviewed has been able to provide evidence of the circumstances surrounding Mrs Shaw's death.
Certification
According to the counterfoil to the MCCD, completed by Shipman, he last saw Mrs Shaw alive on 15th September 1987, six days before her death. This claim is consistent with the last entry in the medical records. However, Mrs Shaw's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for that day.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate, where he recorded that the death had occurred at 8pm on 21st
September 1987. He stated that he had attended Mrs Shaw during her last illness for four months and had last seen her alive on 15th
September. He said that he saw the body 16 hours after death. The mode of death was said to be a coma lasting approximately 12 hours. Shipman recorded that his views as to mode and cause of death were based on statements made by staff at The Sycamores who, he said, were present at the moment of death.
The following entry appears in Mrs Shaw's medical records:
'22 9 87 V
(
visit
)
Died
seen 12 noon Sycamores
1a
Ca stomach'
.
This suggests that Shipman saw the body at The Sycamores at noon on 22nd
September, which was, as he said on Form B, 16 hours after Mrs Shaw's death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker has considered the medical records in this case, but found them to be so scanty that he was unable to reach any conclusion as to the extent to which the cause of death was supported by the medical history.
Conclusion
I agree with Professor Baker that the medical records are quite inadequate to support a diagnosis of cancer of the stomach as the cause of death. Shipman noted only an abdominal swelling and loss of weight. While those signs are consistent with the diagnosis, they do not form a satisfactory basis for it. The reports that Mrs Shaw deteriorated quickly, was in a coma and did not appear to be in pain are also non-specific. I cannot feel any great confidence that the true cause of death was as certified by Shipman. It might have been; it might not.
Having said that, there is no real reason to suspect that Shipman caused or hastened Mrs Shaw's death. There is no evidence that he saw her on the day of her death. The rota shows that Dr Carroll was the Donneybrook doctor on duty that evening. It seems unlikely that Shipman would have called at The Sycamores that evening.
My conclusion is that it is highly likely that Mrs Shaw died of natural causes. I cannot absolutely exclude the possibility that Shipman called at The Sycamores on the evening of 21st
September and administered something which hastened Mrs Shaw's death, but that possibility seems extremely remote.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001