The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Kenneth Harry Simpson
Introduction
Mr Kenneth Harry Simpson died at his home, 29 Dowson Road, Hyde on Friday, 17th
April 1987 at the age of 61. He was registered as a patient of Shipman who certified that the cause of Mr Simpson's death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the oesophagus.
In September 2001, the Inquiry published a list of cases in which it had not been possible to trace any relative of the deceased. In response to that advertisement, Miss Carol Anne Simpson, Mr Simpson's daughter, contacted the Inquiry and has now provided a statement. The Inquiry has also taken a statement from her son, Mr Julian Barrie Simpson, and has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1987 and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer diary. Mr Simpson's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Simpson lived with his wife, Mrs Annie Simpson, who has since died. In October 1986, Mr Simpson was found to be suffering from cancer of the oesophagus. In January or February 1987, he underwent surgery which it was hoped would enable him to swallow more easily. This was only partially successful and Mr Simpson continued to have difficulty in eating. Mr Simpson declined further treatment for the cancer and Miss Simpson gave up her job to nurse her father at home.
Miss Simpson remembers that Shipman prescribed medication in liquid form to ease her father's pain. She does not know what it was but says that, as time went by, the medication was increased in strength. She recalls that her father sometimes had hallucinations. The medication may well have been an opiate.
Towards the end of his life, Mr Simpson received assistance from Macmillan nurses and district nurses. He developed pneumonia and his breathing became laboured.
Shipman visited Mr Simpson regularly and his name appears in Shipman's visits book on six occasions during April 1987.
The Day of the Death
According to Miss Simpson, Shipman visited her father at 6pm on Friday, 17th
April. Miss Simpson did not usually stay in the room during Shipman's consultations with her father, but on this occasion she did. Shipman gave her father an injection and said that 'if nothing happened' he would come back in a few hours. It appears that he gave the family his home telephone number. Miss Simpson assumed that the injection was for pain relief.
Mr Simpson died at about 10pm that night. Miss Simpson recalls that only she and her mother were present at the death. However, Mr Julian Simpson says that he too was present at the death.
Dr Bills was the Donneybrook doctor on duty that evening under the out of hours rota. However, as Shipman had given Miss Simpson his home telephone number, she telephoned him to tell him that her father had died. Shipman told her that he had been about to come over to see Mr Simpson in any event. He arrived about ten minutes later and confirmed that Mr Simpson had died.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate itself has not been recovered, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that the cause of death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the oesophagus. Miss Simpson recalls that Shipman said that pneumonia had also played a part in causing Mr Simpson's death but this was not mentioned on the MCCD counterfoil. Shipman recorded that he had last seen Mr Simpson alive on the day of his death. He had seen the body after death. There would not be a post-mortem examination. The MCCD counterfoil was dated 17th
April.
There are no cremation documents.
Mr Simpson's widow was the informant in relation to his death and it is recorded on the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') that she was present at the moment of his death.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mr Simpson died of natural causes as certified by Shipman.
It is clear that Mr Simpson was seriously ill and had reached the terminal phase. His death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
Shipman attended Mr Simpson several times in the days before his death. It is likely that Shipman, and possibly the district and Macmillan nurses, were giving him pain-relieving injections, probably of a strong opiate. Shipman last saw Mr Simpson alive at about 6pm and gave him an injection. Miss Simpson says that he lived for about another four hours after that. It seems to me highly unlikely that that injection caused or hastened Mr Simpson's death. Professor Henry McQuay and Dr John Grenville have given joint generic evidence to the Inquiry as to the timing and effect of opiates. If a lethal injection of opiates were administered intravenously, then death would follow within minutes. If administered intramuscularly, a lethal injection of opiates would cause death within about an hour. It appears to me that Shipman's treatment of Mr Simpson was entirely appropriate.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001