The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Florence Sidebotham
Introduction
Mrs Florence Sidebotham died at Yew Trees, a residential home for the elderly, Yew Tree Lane, Dukinfield on Monday, 29th
June 1981 at the age of 83. She was a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was senility due to generalised cerebral arteriosclerosis.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Sidebotham's son, Mr Gordon Sidebotham and from her granddaughter, Mrs Glynis Cutter. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1981, the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and to the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). The medical records have not survived and the Inquiry has been unable to recover any nursing notes or diaries from Yew Trees.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
Mrs Sidebotham developed dementia about two years before her death. She also had several fits or episodes of unconsciousness. It became impossible for her to continue living in her own home and she moved to Yew Trees about six months before her death.
Mrs Cutter visited her grandmother frequently at Yew Trees. Mrs Sidebotham's condition remained the same and she continued to suffer periods of unconsciousness. These were almost certainly due to the generalised cerebral arteriosclerosis to which Shipman was to attribute her death. In June 1981, Mrs Cutter was due to take a holiday in Greece. She visited her grandmother shortly before she left and explained that she would be away for two weeks. Mrs Sidebotham said nothing in response, but this was not unusual and was probably attributable to her dementia. Her condition at this time was much as it had been in recent weeks.
Mr Sidebotham recalls that someone telephoned him on Monday, 29th
June 1981 to tell him that his mother had died. He thinks the call must have been from a member of the staff at Yew Trees. He travelled up to Hyde and recalls seeing his mother's body at the undertakers' premises.
Mrs Cutter recalls that she received a telephone call from her father a few days after she arrived in Greece informing her that her grandmother had died. She was not surprised. None of the family ever had any concern or suspicion about the death and attributed it to the effect of Mrs Sidebotham's repeated fits.
Certification
The counterfoil to the MCCD, completed by Shipman, records that he last saw Mrs Sidebotham alive on 25th
June 1981 and that her death occurred on 29th
June 1981. Mrs Sidebotham's name appears in the visits book on 29th
June but it does not appear on 25th
June.
Conclusion
The evidence suggests that Mrs Sidebotham suffered from severe senile dementia. There is also evidence that she suffered fits in the last two years of her life. This picture is consistent with the cause of death certified by Shipman. Her death was not unexpected.
Unfortunately, very little is known about the circumstances immediately surrounding Mrs Sidebotham's death. Her son lived away from the area and her granddaughter, who saw her quite often, was away on holiday at the time of her death. There are no surviving records from Yew Trees. Thus, it is impossible to say whether Shipman visited Mrs Sidebotham shortly before her death. The only evidence suggesting that he may have visited her before her death is the appearance of her name in the visits book for the day of her death. This could have been a reminder to Shipman to attend to certify the death. On the other hand, it could represent an intention to visit while she was alive. It is possible that Shipman's claim that he had last seen Mrs Sidebotham alive on 25th
June was false, as her name does not appear in his visits book for that day.
I regret to say that I am unable to determine whether Mrs Sidebotham's death was natural or was caused by an unlawful act on the part of Shipman.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001