The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Gertrude Millicent Shepherd
Introduction
Mrs Gertrude Millicent Shepherd died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Monday, 6th
March 1972 at the age of 73. She had probably been admitted three days earlier. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis. Chronic asthmatic bronchitis was said to be a contributory cause. At the time of Mrs Shepherd’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Michael Ronald Shepherd, Mrs Shepherd’s oldest surviving grandchild. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Shepherd’s hospital records. No post-mortem examination was performed. Mrs Shepherd was buried and so there are no cremation documents. Professor Richard Baker has considered and commented on the hospital records.
Until they became aware that Shipman had certified the cause of Mrs Shepherd’s death, the family had never had any suspicion about it. Now, however, they do have some concern.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
At the time of her death, Mrs Shepherd had been a widow for about 20 years. She lived independently in her own home in Castleford but was in frequent contact with her family. She had a long history of problems with asthma. She was seen regularly at the out-patient chest clinic of PGI and, on several occasions, she was admitted to the ward following acute exacerbations of her asthma. She was treated with a wide range of medication and had been on steroids since 1966. In November 1970, she was admitted to PGI suffering from chest pain which was noted to have been
‘gripping in character lasting for over two hours’
. She was diagnosed as having suffered a myocardial infarction. She was admitted again in December 1971 with further cardiac problems. These persisted after admission but eventually settled and Mrs Shepherd was discharged shortly before Christmas.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
Mr Shepherd cannot remember the circumstances of his grandmother’s last admission to PGI. He says that her neighbours used to keep an eye on her and so, if she was suddenly taken ill, it is likely that they would have known and would have called the doctor.
The admission note (not made by Shipman) records that Mrs Shepherd was semi-conscious on arrival and had a history of severe pain radiating to her left shoulder. This was suggestive of heart pain. On examination, she was very pale and cold. The diagnosis of a further myocardial infarction was made.
In-Patient Treatment
Shipman saw Mrs Shepherd on 4th
March, when he recorded that she had no further chest pain, although he found crepitations and rhonchi in the lungs.
Mr Shepherd cannot remember going to visit his grandmother during her final stay at PGI.
The Day of the Death
After Shipman’s entry in the medical records for 4th
March, the next entry is dated 6th
March; this was also made by Shipman. He stated that Mrs Shepherd had died at 11.10am. He did not record that he saw her before her death. He reported having made a full examination of her body and having completed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death. He noted that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis and that chronic bronchial asthma had contributed to it.
Medical Evidence
Professor Baker has considered and commented on the hospital records. They are not easy to read. Professor Baker thinks that the admission note suggests that Mrs Shepherd had been given an injection of 100mg pethidine by her general practitioner prior to admission. If that was given, it would have been appropriate treatment for the severe pain that Mrs Shepherd would have been suffering at the time. Professor Baker observes that the records provide very little information about care after admission, which makes it difficult to reach firm conclusions about what happened. However, in his view, there are no features that would give rise to concern.
Conclusion
Were it not for the fact that Shipman was involved in treating Mrs Shepherd before her death and were it not for the fact that he certified the cause of her death, there would be absolutely no reason to suspect that she died as a result of anything other than natural causes. Mrs Shepherd had a long history of asthma and cardiac problems and she clearly suffered a very severe myocardial infarction three days before she died. Even though she made a partial recovery from this severe episode she was at very high risk indeed of suffering a further episode over the ensuing days.
Although Shipman was involved in Mrs Shepherd’s treatment, there is nothing to suggest that he played a sinister role in her death. The note recording her death is very brief. It does not suggest that Shipman saw Mrs Shepherd alive on the day of her death. It is consistent with his having been called to her after the death had already occurred. I cannot say with complete confidence that that is what happened. However, there are two reasons why I feel able to give Mrs Shepherd’s family reassurance that the death was almost certainly natural. First, Mrs Shepherd’s previous history of heart problems was such that she was at grave risk of suffering a further, fatal, heart attack. Second, this death occurred during the late morning, at a time when there would be several members of the nursing staff about. It is unlikely that, at that time of day, Shipman would have had the opportunity of seeing Mrs Shepherd alone, without the presence of a nurse, or that he would have been able to give her any drug that might have caused her death. In the circumstances, I am able to reassure Mrs Shepherd’s family that the death was almost certainly natural.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001