The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Marian Siemiernik
Introduction
Mrs Marian Siemiernik died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Thursday, 18th
May 1972 at the age of 59. It seems likely that she had been admitted to PGI about a week to ten days earlier. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. Two previous coronary thromboses were recorded as being a secondary cause of death. At the time of Mrs Siemiernik’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Siemiernik’s daughter, Mrs Marion Thomson, and Mrs Siemiernik’s son, Mr Stefan Siemiernik, who is Mrs Thomson’s stepbrother. Mrs Siemiernik’s husband, also Mr Stefan Siemiernik, who was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’), has since died. A statement was also taken from Mrs Kathleen Naylor, the senior nursing sister on Ward 1 at the time. Mrs Siemiernik’s hospital records are no longer available. Mrs Siemiernik’s body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. No post-mortem examination was performed.
In their statements, both Mr Siemiernik and Mrs Thomson indicate that, although they were shocked by Mrs Siemiernik’s death because they had thought that her condition was improving, neither had had any suspicions about it. Mr Siemiernik wondered whether more might have been done to help her but also says that to have such thoughts
‘is just human nature when something like this happens’
.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers.
Personal Background
Mrs Siemiernik had been living in the Pontefract area for about seven years before her death. She had previously lived in Scotland. At the time of her death, her son was 17 and lived at home. Both Mrs Siemiernik’s husband and her son worked as coal miners. Mrs Thomson was 32 years old and lived in Scotland. She had seen her mother regularly before she moved to Pontefract, but thereafter saw her only once every few months.
Mrs Siemiernik was a cigarette smoker. She had suffered a coronary thrombosis in 1964 or 1965. She seemed to recover well after a period in hospital but the family moved into a bungalow on medical advice. Mr Siemiernik thinks that this was to avoid his mother having to climb stairs. However, apart from that, he thinks that his mother’s health was generally good. She smoked less than previously. She would still get out and about although not as much as she had before her heart attack.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
About a week or ten days before Mrs Siemiernik died, she suffered a further heart attack. She was admitted to the coronary care unit at PGI, which was on Ward 2. Upon receiving the news of her mother’s admission to hospital, Mrs Thomson left her children in the care of a neighbour and travelled to Pontefract with her husband.
Mrs Siemiernik’s condition was obviously very serious at the time of her admission. Mr Siemiernik remembers that she was connected to various items of equipment. She was conscious but sleeping a lot. After a few days, her condition improved, her colour returned and she was moved onto the main female medical ward, Ward 1. Mrs Siemiernik seemed to continue to improve. She could get about the ward and was much brighter in herself. Mr Siemiernik thought it was just a matter of time before his mother would be discharged home. Mrs Thomson remembers that she asked the nursing staff how Mrs Siemiernik was; she was told that Mrs Siemiernik
‘was getting there and was doing ok and was on the mend’
. She was able to return to Scotland to resume caring for her children.
The Day of the Death
On the day of Mrs Siemiernik’s death, Mr Siemiernik and his father were working the afternoon shift, which ended at 7.15pm. A member of staff from the hospital telephoned the mine that afternoon and informed them that Mrs Siemiernik had suffered a further heart attack. Mr Siemiernik and his father went straight to PGI. Having been told by the Inquiry that the details on Form B of the cremation certificate suggest that Mrs Siemiernik died at 6.20pm after suffering a heart attack 40 minutes earlier, Mr Siemiernik accepts that it is possible that this information is correct. His recollection on timings is understandably hazy. The two men did not see Mrs Siemiernik before she died. Mr Siemiernik remembers that, after they arrived at the hospital, they sat outside a room in which he understood the medical staff were
‘working on’
Mrs Siemiernik. Eventually a ward sister told them that Mrs Siemiernik had suffered a further heart attack and that the doctors had done everything they could to try to save her, but they had been unsuccessful.
Certification
On 19th
May 1972, Shipman completed cremation Form B. He stated that the time of death was
‘1820hrs’
; this is the same time as was recorded on Form A, which was signed by Mrs Siemiernik’s husband. That may well be correct. Shipman stated that he had attended Mrs Siemiernik during her last illness for ten days, which is consistent with the recollection of the family. He said that he had last seen Mrs Siemiernik alive on the day of her death. He noted that he performed a complete examination of the body immediately after death. The cause of death was stated to be coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. Two previous coronary thromboses were said to have contributed to the death. The mode of death was said to be coronary arrest of 40 minutes’ duration. Shipman said that this information was based on his own observations. In response to the question
‘Who were the persons (if any) present at the moment of death?’
Shipman wrote
‘Self’
. He recorded that Mrs Siemiernik had been nursed by Mrs Naylor during her final illness. Mrs Naylor has no recollection of the death of Mrs Siemiernik.
Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain completed Form C. He recorded that he had seen and questioned Shipman and also that he had seen and questioned the nursing staff on Ward 1. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Conclusion
In the absence of the medical records, it is not possible to know how serious Mrs Siemiernik’s condition was before her death. However, she had plainly suffered more than one heart attack and was at risk of suffering another which might well be fatal. Were it not for the fact that Shipman was involved in Mrs Siemiernik’s treatment, there would be no reason to suspect that her death was other than natural. However, Shipman was involved in her treatment and claimed that he had been present at the moment of death. He implied that he had been alone with her. That is a feature which usually gives rise to suspicion although, as I have explained in
Chapter Seven
, there were occasions when Shipman was not present alone at the moment of death, even though he had suggested to the contrary on Form B. I am satisfied that this is such a case. Mr Siemiernik’s evidence suggests that several people were attending his mother shortly before her death and were trying to save her life. As she was only 59 and as she was not suffering respiratory illness as well as heart disease, I would have expected that the staff would have tried to resuscitate her if she suffered a heart attack with cardiac arrest.
Although Shipman’s claimed presence at the death does not allow me to rule out the possibility that he played some sinister part in the death, there is no evidence to suggest that he did and I think it very likely that Mrs Siemiernik’s death was natural.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001