The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Ernest Sheard
Introduction
Mr Ernest Sheard died on Ward 2, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Monday, 22nd
May 1972 at the age of 73. He had been admitted to PGI about one or two weeks earlier. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was left ventricular failure due to bronchopneumonia. Coronary thrombosis was recorded as a condition contributing to the death but not related to the immediate cause. At the time of Mr Sheard’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Dorothy Birkby, Mr Sheard’s daughter. Mrs Birkby was named as informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’). Mr Sheard’s hospital records are no longer available. Mr Sheard was buried. There is no record of a post-mortem examination having been carried out, although Mrs Birkby believes that one was performed.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mr Sheard was married and, at the time of his death, lived with his wife. Mrs Birkby, who was in her early 40s at the time, lived two doors away from her parents. She saw them every day. Mr Sheard had worked as a textile dyer until his retirement in 1960. He suffered a coronary thrombosis about three years before his death. Until that point, he had smoked between 10 and 15 cigarettes a day. He gave up smoking but started again shortly before he died. He was an occasional drinker. Mrs Birkby does not think that Mr Sheard was admitted to hospital following his coronary thrombosis. Rather, he was told to stay in bed for about three weeks. She remembers that he was told that he had an enlarged heart and that the coronary thrombosis had done some damage to one of the valves in his heart.
Mrs Birkby says that her father was in quite good health in the months before his death. He was of slim build and quite active. He was a sociable man and would go out each day to visit friends or go to the library. He would walk about a mile each day. So far as Mrs Birkby recalls, Mr Sheard was not taking any regular medication.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
Mr Sheard was taken ill a week or two before he died. Mrs Birkby remembers that, at about 8.15am one morning, her mother rushed into the house to say that there was something wrong with Mr Sheard. He had got up as usual but, at breakfast, he had been unable to swallow his porridge. It had been dribbling from the sides of his mouth. Mrs Birkby went round to see her father and could see that he was unwell. Mr Sheard’s general practitioner (GP) was called to the house. He examined Mr Sheard and made a provisional diagnosis of heart attack and referred him to PGI where he was taken by ambulance.
In-Patient Treatment
Mrs Birkby visited her father in hospital and recalls that he was admitted to the main male medical ward, which would have been Ward 2. He was sitting up in bed, talking normally, and did not appear unwell. Mrs Birkby cannot remember discussing her father’s condition with any of the medical staff. Although she understood that tests would be carried out, she was never informed of any test results.
Mrs Birkby visited her father on a number of occasions while he was in PGI, although she is uncertain how long he was there before his death. It might have been about a week or two. She last visited during the evening of the day before Mr Sheard’s death. She remembers that he was in a very distressed state because the staff had taken away his pyjama trousers. Mrs Birkby went to speak to a member of the nursing staff to find out what had happened. The ward sister told her that Mr Sheard had been agitating to go home and had been getting out of bed to try to telephone Mrs Birkby. The staff had been worried that he might hurt himself. His trousers had been removed to prevent him from getting out of bed. The ward sister said that Mr Sheard would be coming home the following afternoon. Mrs Birkby recollects that she was told that the hospital would contact the family the following afternoon to arrange Mr Sheard’s discharge from hospital.
The Day of the Death
At about midday on the day of the death, Mrs Birkby received a telephone call from the hospital. She was told that Mr Sheard had just died. She was very shocked by the news. Mrs Birkby and her mother went to the hospital by taxi. She remembers speaking to a ward sister but not to any doctors. The sister said that the death had been very sudden. Mrs Birkby recalls that there was some discussion about a post-mortem examination. The nurse said that there should be one because the death had been sudden. Mrs Birkby says that she was very strongly opposed to the idea but her mother’s attitude was that, if the hospital felt that one had to be done, then it must be done. However, it appears that no post-mortem examination was carried out. Not only do the mortuary records contain no reference to Mr Sheard but also Mrs Birkby recollects that she and her mother were given a certificate that day and went to register the death immediately. That recollection is very probably correct because the death was registered on the day of the death.
Mrs Birkby did not see her father’s body, but her husband viewed the body at the chapel of rest and told her that her father had looked very peaceful.
Medical Evidence
Dr Aneez Esmail, Medical Advisor to the Inquiry, has advised me that the causes of death certified by Shipman are quite inconsistent with the evidence that Mr Sheard was well on the evening before his death and was about to be discharged. They are also inconsistent with the suggestion that he had been trying to get out of bed. A patient suffering from bronchopneumonia of such severity as to cause death would not be discharged from hospital and would not be able to get out of bed.
Other Events
As shown in Appendices B and C to the Report, Shipman certified the cause of death of three other patients who died on 22nd
May 1972.
Conclusion
In the absence of any medical records or cremation certificates, there is very little evidence on which to base a conclusion. Mrs Birkby’s recollection of her mother’s description of Mr Sheard’s sudden collapse suggests that the problem was either a cardiac episode (as the GP suspected) or a stroke. However, Mrs Birkby’s recollection of events after her father’s admission does not fit well with Shipman’s certification of the cause of death. Once in hospital, Mrs Birkby recalls that her father made a gradual recovery and, by the evening before his death, was ready to come home. So eager was he to do so that he had been getting out of bed to telephone his wife and he was distressed, apparently because the nurses had sought to prevent him from doing so. Mrs Birkby’s recollection is that her father improved in hospital rather than deteriorated. An alternative explanation for his distress is that his condition had in fact deteriorated; he had developed bronchopneumonia and was becoming confused due to impairment of the oxygen supply to his brain. If this is what had happened, Mr Sheard would have been at risk of sudden death due to ventricular failure, as his cardiac status was already compromised. The following day, Mr Sheard died quite suddenly and Shipman certified the cause of death as left ventricular failure (a cardiac problem) due to bronchopneumonia.
On the evidence available, I am unable to make a judgement about what happened. If Mr Sheard was suffering from bronchopneumonia, he would not have been fit to be discharged the following day; he would have been very poorly and he might well have been confused. Mrs Birkby says that her father was to be discharged the following day. The causes of death given by Shipman and Mrs Birkby’s recollection of events are inconsistent with each other. As there are no medical records or other contemporaneous documents from which I can find out about the nature and course of Mr Sheard’s illness, I find myself unable to reach any conclusion about Shipman’s involvement in his death.
I very much regret that the Inquiry has had to make these enquiries so many years after the death, and I am sorry for the disturbance this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI, once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001