The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Wilfred Arnold Sanderson
Introduction
Mr Wilfred Arnold Sanderson died on Ward 2, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Thursday, 18th
March 1971 at the age of 62. He had been admitted about nine days earlier. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension. Coronary thrombosis was said to have contributed to the death. At the time of Mr Sanderson’s death, Shipman was a house officer in medicine.
Mr Sanderson’s brother, Mr Raymond Sanderson, was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’). He has since died. Mr Sanderson’s son is still alive but suffers from ill health, and no statement has been taken from him. A statement was, however, taken from Mr David Sanderson, Mr Sanderson’s nephew. Before providing his statement, he discussed the circumstances of his uncle’s death with his mother. A witness statement was also taken from Mrs Rosina Patrick, who was a day sister on Ward 2 at the time of Mr Sanderson’s death. Mr Sanderson’s hospital records are no longer available. His body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. No post-mortem examination was performed.
Mr David Sanderson has informed the Inquiry that the family had no concerns about the circumstances of Mr Sanderson’s death, which they regarded as being wholly natural.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
At the time of his death, Mr Sanderson was married and lived with his wife and son. He was a master blacksmith. It appears that he was very strong and industrious, sometimes working seven days a week. He worked right up until the time of his final admission to PGI. He did, however, have a history of raised blood pressure and he had suffered a minor stroke. He was off work for about three or four months but made a good recovery. He also suffered a coronary thrombosis a few years before his death. Attempts to persuade him to reduce his workload were to no avail.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
During the night of 8th
or 9th
March 1971, Mr Sanderson suffered a further stroke. This time, it was extremely debilitating. Mr Sanderson lost the power of speech and was completely paralysed down his left side. He was admitted to PGI.
Mr David Sanderson’s mother visited Mr Sanderson in hospital several times. She has a clear recollection that he was on a side ward, not on the main ward, and was accommodated there from the time of his initial admission to hospital until his death. As far as Mr David Sanderson is aware, his uncle never regained the power of speech and there was no improvement in his condition during the time he was in hospital. The family was aware that Mr Sanderson’s prognosis was very poor.
The Day of the Death
Mr David Sanderson’s mother remembers that Mr Sanderson died late in the evening. Mr David Sanderson can remember that the family decided not to tell Mr Sanderson’s wife until the following morning. This recollection that the death occurred late in the evening is consistent with the contents of the cremation forms.
Certification
Shipman completed cremation Form B. He wrote that Mr Sanderson died at 11.50pm on 18th
March 1971. He said, and this is probably correct, that he had attended him during his last illness for nine days. Asked to state when he had last seen Mr Sanderson alive, he simply wrote
‘18/3/71.’
He said that he had seen Mr Sanderson’s body
‘5-6 minutes’
after the death and that he had made a complete examination of it. He stated that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension. He said that the mode of death was a coma lasting three days. That information was said to be based on his own observations. He said that Mr Sanderson was nursed during his last illness by Sister Patrick. Mrs Patrick has no recollection of Mr Sanderson. She was on day duty at the time and would have nursed him only until 9pm on the day of his death. Shipman recorded that he was present at the moment of death, but did not suggest that anyone else was present. Mrs Patrick says that for a doctor to be alone with a patient at the time of death was extremely unusual. She says that this was particularly the case where the patient had been in a coma for three days. The only treatment that the patient would be expected to be given would be
‘tender loving care’
. In such cases, according to her, a doctor would usually be advised by a nurse when the patient had died. She does not see why Shipman should have been present alone at the death of the patient.
Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain completed Form C. He recorded that he had seen and questioned Shipman and the nursing staff on Ward 2. He declared himself satisfied that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Conclusion
It is clear from the available evidence that Mr Sanderson was gravely ill at the time of his admission to PGI, that his condition did not improve during the course of that admission and that there was no realistic prospect of improvement or recovery. But for the fact that Shipman was involved in his treatment, there would be no reason to suspect that his death was anything other than the natural consequence of a stroke resulting from a chronic history of raised blood pressure.
However, Shipman was involved in Mr Sanderson’s care. Moreover, according to what Shipman wrote on Form B, he alone was present at the time of Mr Sanderson’s death. That death occurred late at night. That was a time when there would have been few nurses on the ward and when Shipman might have had the opportunity to go unobserved into a side room where a patient was lying. As Mrs Patrick has observed, there would be no obvious reason for him to have gone into Mr Sanderson’s room that night.
I cannot say whether Shipman did in fact go into Mr Sanderson’s room shortly before his death. Shipman’s claim that he was present at the death may not have been true. He might have been summoned only after the death. However, the fact that he claimed to have been present leaves some suspicion in my mind that he might have seen Mr Sanderson shortly before the death and have given him something that hastened the death. However, I am quite satisfied that, if Shipman did do anything to hasten Mr Sanderson’s death, the effect could only have been to bring forward the death by a short period. There can have been no realistic prospect of recovery.
I very much regret that I have had to raise these doubts so many years after the death and I am sorry for the distress this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI, once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001