The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX C - Chronological List of Deaths Considered
>
Alice Smith
Introduction
Mrs Alice Smith died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Friday, 14th
April 1972 at the age of 80. She had been admitted to PGI about ten days earlier. Shipman certified that the cause of death was congestive heart failure. A left-sided
‘hemiplegia-cerebro vascular accident’
was said to be a secondary cause of death. At the time of Mrs Smith’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Avis Butterworth, Mrs Smith’s daughter. Mrs Smith’s son, Mr Sidney Parker Smith, who was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’), has since died. Mrs Smith’s hospital records are no longer available. Mrs Smith’s body was buried. No post-mortem examination was performed.
Mrs Butterworth had no concerns about the circumstances of her mother’s death. Although the death came very suddenly, the family had no doubt at the time that it was a natural death.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers.
Personal Background
Mrs Smith was a widow and lived with her son. She was independent and mentally alert. Mrs Butterworth visited her mother every Saturday and also often saw her during the week.
Mrs Smith had suffered from heart problems for many years before her death. These problems were not serious. If she over-exerted herself, she would feel weary and would have to rest. About three or four years before she died, Mrs Smith suffered a slight stroke from which she made a good recovery. Occasionally, when Mrs Smith was tired, the effects of the stroke were noticeable in her eye, and her speech would become impaired. There was a history of strokes in Mrs Smith’s family.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
About ten days before she was admitted to PGI, Mrs Smith suffered a further stroke. Her son and daughter looked after her at home but her condition gradually deteriorated. She developed weakness on her left side and her speech became impaired. She also became incontinent and Mrs Butterworth and her brother found that they were unable to feed her. It was apparent that Mrs Smith needed professional care and she was admitted to PGI.
Mrs Butterworth thinks that Mrs Smith was in PGI for about ten days before she died. Both son and daughter saw their mother very frequently, during normal visiting times. Mrs Smith was in a room on her own. That would have been one of the side rooms or cubicles into which, the Inquiry has been told, patients were transferred when they became seriously ill or were expected to die soon. She remained incontinent and was confused. However, she remained conscious for most of the time. She was able to speak to her family and would wave her visitors goodbye as they left.
Mrs Butterworth cannot remember seeing or speaking about her mother’s condition to any doctors or nurses at the hospital. She does not recall anyone telling her that her mother was very poorly. However, it is clear from her description of her mother’s condition that she must have realised that her mother was very ill.
The family decided that Mrs Smith needed to be placed in long-term residential care and arrangements were made for her to be transferred from PGI to a local geriatric hospital. Mrs Smith knew the geriatric hospital because she had visited a relative there in the past and she had dreaded becoming a patient there. In the event, she died before she was transferred.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Butterworth remembers her brother telling her that he had visited their mother on the evening on which she died. After he left the hospital, he went out for a drink with a friend. He did not say that he had found that Mrs Smith’s condition had worsened or that the staff had told him that there was any cause for concern. Mrs Butterworth is sure that, if her brother had felt that Mrs Smith had taken a turn for the worse, he would not have left the hospital.
At about 11pm, Mrs Butterworth received a telephone call from a nurse informing her that her mother had died. The nurse said that the hospital staff had been concerned about Mrs Smith all day because her heart was failing. Mrs Butterworth said in her Inquiry statement that no one from the hospital had told her brother earlier that evening that there were concerns about Mrs Smith and no one from the hospital had contacted the family to say that they should return.
Mrs Butterworth remembers that the family members were all shocked because the death had happened suddenly when her mother appeared to have improved slightly.
Other Events
Shipman also certified the causes of death of Mrs Agnes Davidson and Mrs Elizabeth Thwaites, both of whom died on Ward 1 that night. I am suspicious about his involvement in both their deaths.
Conclusion
In the absence of medical records and cremation certification, there is very little evidence upon which to base a conclusion. From Mrs Butterworth’s description of her mother’s decline, it is entirely possible that she died a natural death on 14th
April 1972. The only reasons why one might harbour any suspicions about the death are that Shipman was clearly on duty and involved with patients on the ward, the family had not been warned that Mrs Smith’s death was imminent and the death occurred during the evening. An abnormally large proportion of deaths whose cause was certified by Shipman occurred between the hours of 6pm and midnight and any death certified by him which occurred during this period is to some extent suspicious. That would be the period during which it would be relatively easy for him to gain access to a patient in the absence of a nurse. On this particular evening, at 10.15pm and 10.30pm, he also claimed to have been present at two other deaths on the ward about which I am suspicious. I conclude that, although Mrs Smith might well have died a natural death, there is some cause to suspect that Shipman might have caused it.
I very much regret that I have had to raise these doubts so many years after the death and I am sorry for the distress this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI, once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001