The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Walter Spence
Introduction
Mr Walter Spence died on Ward 2, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Sunday, 23rd
April 1972 at the age of 75. He had been admitted to PGI ten days earlier. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was myocardial infarction due to coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease and that a left pleural effusion and cancer of the left bronchus had contributed to the death. At the time of Mr Spence’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Spence’s niece, Mrs Mary Hodgson. Mrs Jennifer Bratley (formerly Miss Jennifer Buckley), who worked as a sister on Ward 2 at the relevant time, also provided a statement. The Inquiry has had access to Mr Spence’s available hospital records. A post-mortem examination was carried out on the body. The report of that examination is no longer available, but the PGI mortuary post-mortem book still exists and it contains a brief record of each examination carried out. Mr Spence was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. Mrs Hodgson has been able to refer to her diary for 1972, which she still retains.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mr Spence was married and lived with his wife in Knottingley, near Pontefract. Until retirement, he worked as a glass works boilerman. Mrs Hodgson recalls that her uncle suffered from heart trouble for which he took many different tablets. She now thinks that he probably had angina. He used to have what he called
‘funny dos’
. Mrs Hodgson says that her uncle was often poorly. Her diary entry for 25th
March 1972 records that she had just learned that Mr Spence had cancer.
The Inquiry has had access to some medical records but these relate to a hospital admission in 1961. Their only relevance for the purposes of the Inquiry is that they mention that Mr Spence had a history of angina.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
Mrs Hodgson has no recollection of how Mr Spence came to be admitted to PGI shortly before he died, although she thinks that it was because of breathing difficulties. Her diary records that Mr Spence was admitted on 13th
April. Mrs Hodgson visited her uncle on a number of occasions but cannot remember these visits clearly. However, she remembers that Mr Spence was always on the main ward and not in a cubicle. She recalls that Mrs Spence told her that Mr Spence was poorly with heart trouble.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Hodgson visited Mr Spence in the afternoon of Sunday, 23rd
April. Mr Spence was still in the main area of the ward and was wearing an oxygen mask. He was coherent and would occasionally take the mask off to speak. Mrs Hodgson recalls that he was obviously very ill and she realised that he might soon die.
Later that night, at sometime after 10pm, Mrs Hodgson received information that her uncle had died and that Mrs Spence had not been at the hospital at the time. Mrs Hodgson did not regard the death as unexpected.
Post-Mortem Examination
Mrs Hodgson recalls that the doctors at the hospital wanted to carry out a post-mortem examination and Mrs Spence reluctantly agreed to this. As I have said, the full report of the examination has not survived but there is an entry in the PGI mortuary post-mortem book which records:
‘PM 72/165 25 Spence Walter 76
(
sic
)
Turner PGI Myocardial infarct. Coronary Thrombosis. Left Pleural Effusion. Cancer Left Bronchus ELS’
.
This entry signifies that the post-mortem examination of Mr Spence’s body (PM 72/165) took place on 25th
April 1972, that he was 76 years old when he died and that he was referred for post-mortem examination by Dr (John) Turner, who was a consultant physician. The cause of death was recorded as myocardial infarct due to coronary thrombosis. A left pleural effusion and a cancer of the left bronchus had also been identified. The initials
‘ELS’
are those of the consultant pathologist who performed the post-mortem examination. This brief entry confirms Mrs Hodgson’s recollection that Mr Spence had had both heart and breathing problems.
Certification
Shipman completed cremation Form B. He said that death occurred at
‘2210hrs 23/4/72’
. Shipman said that he had attended Mr Spence during his last illness for a period of ten days. That is consistent with Mrs Hodgson’s evidence that her uncle was admitted to PGI on 13th
April. The causes of death given were those identified by the pathologist. Shipman said that the mode of death was cardiac arrest of two minutes’ duration. He said that he was able to give that information on the basis of his own observations. He said that Sister Buckley had nursed Mr Spence in his last illness and that
‘sister’
had been present at the moment of death. Unfortunately, Mrs Bratley does not remember Mr Spence. Shipman said that he had examined the body 20 minutes after the death. In response to the question asking whether a further examination of the body was desirable, Shipman wrote
‘own PM for hospital use’
.
Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain completed Form C. He recorded that he had seen and questioned Shipman and also that he had seen and questioned the nursing staff on Ward 2. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of this Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Conclusion
It appears from Mrs Hodgson’s recollection of events that Mr Spence was very ill when she saw him on 23rd
April and that he probably did not have long to live. It is entirely possible, even likely, that Mr Spence died a natural death at about 10pm on that day. However, the fact that Shipman appears to have been with Mr Spence very shortly before the death gives rise to some concern. According to Form B, Shipman observed Mr Spence suffering a cardiac arrest only two minutes before he died. That suggests that Shipman was present at Mr Spence’s bedside only two minutes before the death. There may be a perfectly innocent explanation for Shipman’s presence at the bedside at that moment; he might have been summoned by a nurse who had observed a deterioration in Mr Spence’s condition. However, it is also entirely possible that Shipman was at the bedside without a nurse, gave something to Mr Spence to induce cardiac arrest and then went to find a nurse. That would explain why the nurse was present at the moment of death but Shipman himself was not, although he had been there two minutes earlier. I am not saying that that is what happened; I am saying only that that is a possibility. Such possibilities have to be considered where Shipman was involved, particularly in respect of deaths that occurred between the hours of 6pm and midnight. Professor Richard Baker has established that an abnormal proportion of deaths certified by Shipman occurred during this part of the day. It is possible that Mr Spence’s death was one of those that contributed to this abnormal finding. I stress that Mr Spence’s death may well have been natural. I regret to have to leave this suspicion in the minds of Mr Spence’s relatives so many years after his death. However I am quite satisfied that, if Shipman did do anything to hasten the death, it is likely that Mr Spence’s life was shortened only by a few hours. As I explained in
Chapter One
, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001