The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
James Sullivan
Introduction
Mr James Sullivan died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Wednesday, 24th
May 1972 at the age of 80. He had been admitted to PGI on the previous day. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was myocardial failure due to thrombosis of the right pulmonary artery. At the time of Mr Sullivan’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
Mr Sullivan’s nephew, Mr Thomas Higginbottom, who was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’), has since died. Statements have been taken from Mr Higginbottom’s daughter, Mrs Abigail Cheetham, and his son, Mr James Higginbottom. The Inquiry has had access to Mr Sullivan’s hospital records. Mr Sullivan was buried and so there are no cremation documents. A post-mortem examination was carried out but the report is no longer available and nor is there any record of it in the PGI mortuary post-mortem book. Professor Richard Baker has commented on the available documents.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers.
Personal Background
It is clear from the statements made by Mrs Cheetham and Mr Higginbottom that their contact with their great uncle was sporadic in the last months of his life. Their contact with him had been through their grandmother, Mr Sullivan’s sister, who pre-deceased her brother by about six months. Neither Mrs Cheetham nor Mr Higginbottom was aware that Mr Sullivan had any general health problem although Mr Higginbottom remembers that Mr Sullivan used to walk with a stick. Mrs Cheetham suggests that, after his sister’s death, he
‘lost the will to live’
and his condition deteriorated.
The hospital records available to the Inquiry show that, in 1969, Mr Sullivan spent some time in Headlands Hospital suffering from chronic bronchitis. He underwent a hernia repair at PGI in May 1970. In August 1971, his general practitioner (GP) referred him to Dr Warren Jordan, a consultant chest physician at PGI. The letter of referral mentioned rapid weight loss and chronic bronchitis. It appears that the GP was concerned that Mr Sullivan might have cancer. An out-patient assessment reported that he was in poor general condition, although the chest x-ray was unchanged by comparison with previous films. One entry in the records suggests that Mr Sullivan was thought to have an enlarged heart. It was suggested that his condition was mainly due to his age, and symptomatic treatment was advised, i.e. the emphasis was to be on alleviating his symptoms.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
The hospital records contain a referral letter from Mr Sullivan’s GP, dated 23rd
May 1972. The GP wrote that Mr Sullivan had bloodstained sputum and had become doubly incontinent. The GP also mentioned considerable weight loss and wondered whether Mr Sullivan had bronchial cancer. The GP had apparently asked that Mr Sullivan be admitted to Headlands Hospital, a geriatric hospital, but admission had been refused.
There is a detailed admission note made by a doctor other than Shipman. Antibiotics and Alupent were commenced to relieve airway obstruction. Various tests were ordered. The results showed that Mr Sullivan’s sputum was heavily infected but the chest x-ray was reported to show no active pulmonary pathology. The other test results showed no obvious abnormality.
The Day of the Death
The next note in the medical records was made by Shipman after the death and it reads as follows:
‘24/5/72
12 Noon.
pt died
P.M. asked for.
not
reported to coroner.
HFShipman
(
signed
)
’
.
It appears that Shipman did not know the cause of death when he made this note. That is not surprising as the examination carried out the previous day and the results of the tests then ordered did not reveal any obvious potential cause of death. It appears that Shipman (or possibly the consultant who had been in charge of Mr Sullivan’s care) asked for a post-mortem examination. Mr Thomas Higginbottom gave his consent.
Shipman noted and emphasised that the death was not reported to the coroner. I do not know at what time on 23rd
May Mr Sullivan was admitted to hospital. However, if he had been admitted less than 24 hours before his death, Shipman ought to have reported the death to the coroner or ought at least to have discussed the death with the coroner or his officer. It does not appear from this note that Shipman spoke to anyone at the coroner’s office although it is possible that he did. As I have explained in
Chapter Seven
, a wish to avoid reporting a death to the coroner does not always arouse suspicion that Shipman might have caused the death. I believe that he sometimes sought to avoid reporting a death even when it was entirely natural, possibly for selfish financial reasons, possibly so as to avoid the need for further formalities.
Although there is no record of a post-mortem examination in the book in which such procedures were usually recorded, it appears that a post-mortem was in fact performed and that it showed that Mr Sullivan had suffered from a thrombosis in the right pulmonary artery. A note made in the medical records on 25th
May reveals that the post-mortem examination had provided the cause of death which appears on the death certificate. Beneath that note is a short further note to the effect that Shipman signed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death on 26th
March 1972. A letter, dated 12th
June 1972, from Dr Jordan, the consultant chest physician under whose care Mr Sullivan was admitted, to Mr Sullivan’s GP confirms the contents of the notes that I have summarised.
Medical Evidence
Professor Baker observed that the hospital records do not contain any information suggesting a deterioration in Mr Sullivan’s condition prior to his death and that no nursing records are available to shed any further light on Mr Sullivan’s brief hospital stay. He went on to observe that the
‘findings of the post mortem are consistent with the symptoms reported before death, and are sufficiently serious to account for the patient’s death’
.
Conclusion
If it were not for the fact that Shipman made an entry in Mr Sullivan’s hospital records on the day when he died, there would be no evidence to give rise to any cause for concern in this case. The hospital records confirm that his condition deteriorated quite significantly in the months before he died. They also show that there had been a further deterioration in the period immediately before his hospital admission. The entry that Shipman made was made after Mr Sullivan’s death, probably after Shipman had been summoned to confirm that Mr Sullivan was dead. As Professor Baker has observed, the post-mortem examination findings, which are consistent with the symptoms reported before the death, are sufficiently serious to account for Mr Sullivan’s death. He had a blockage of an important artery. The fact that Shipman appeared not to know the cause of death when it occurred and arranged for a post-mortem examination to be undertaken strongly suggests that this death was entirely natural. Taking all of these matters into account, I conclude that it is highly unlikely that Shipman played any sinister part in this death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001