The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Agnes Scott
Introduction
Mrs Agnes Scott died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Wednesday, 10th
May 1972 at the age of 75. She had been admitted to PGI earlier that day. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to coronary thrombosis. A squamous epithelioma of the sigmoid colon and rectum was said to be a secondary cause of death. At the time of Mrs Scott’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken statements from two of Mrs Scott’s daughters, Mrs Ellen Haigh and Mrs Mary More. Another of Mrs Scott’s daughters, Mrs Mary Gornall, who was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’), has since died. A statement was also taken from Mrs Linda Byford, who was at the time a junior nursing sister on the ward. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Scott’s hospital records. Mrs Scott’s body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. No post-mortem examination was performed. Professor Richard Baker has considered the available contemporaneous documents.
In her Inquiry statement, Mrs More says that the inconsistent timings recorded on Form B, and the evidence suggesting that Shipman was present at the moment of her mother’s death, have
‘planted seeds of doubt’
in her mind about the cause of death. Mrs Haigh shares Mrs More’s concern.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mrs Scott was a widow for about 18 years. She had nine children. At the time of her death, she was active for her age and lived independently at home. She went to bingo two or three times a week with Mrs Gornall, who lived next door. Mrs Gornall sometimes helped Mrs Scott with her shopping.
Mrs Scott suffered from spondylitis and had pain in her neck and arms. Mrs More remembers an occasion when Mrs Scott was admitted to hospital after she had accidentally taken an overdose of the barbiturates prescribed for her spondylitis. Mrs More does not think that her mother ever suffered from heart trouble or high blood pressure.
In January 1968, Mrs Scott had an abdominal-perineal excision for a squamous epithelioma, following which she had a colostomy. Mrs More remembers that her mother was in hospital for a couple of weeks after the operation and then made a good recovery. She had no further serious health problems.
The Day of the Death
At about midday on Wednesday, 10th
May 1972, Mrs More received a visit from Mrs Gornall, who told her that their mother had suffered a
‘funny turn’
the previous night after her return home from bingo. Mrs Scott had spent the night at Mrs Gornall’s house. Mrs More thinks that Mrs Scott’s general practitioner (GP) had visited Mrs Scott. Mrs Gornall assured Mrs More that there was no need to be concerned. At about 12.45pm, Mrs More called at Mrs Gornall’s house. She found her mother sitting upright on the settee. She looked cheerful and seemed her usual self. She said that she was all right and wanted to go back to her own home. Mrs Gornall and Mrs More helped her to walk next door. As Mrs Scott was being settled onto her settee, she complained of feeling sick. Mrs More went to fetch a bucket and, when she returned only moments later, she found her mother slumped on the settee. Her tongue was extended and her eyes were staring. She was not breathing normally and she appeared to be exhaling all the time. Help was summoned and, within a few minutes, Mrs Scott’s GP and an ambulance had arrived. Mrs Gornall and Mrs More accompanied Mrs Scott in the ambulance to PGI.
Mrs More and Mrs Gornall were told to wait in a side room after their arrival at PGI. They were able to see their mother about half an hour later. Mrs Scott was in a cubicle. She was lying on her side and there was an oxygen mask on her face and a tube in her mouth. She seemed settled and her eyes were closed. Mrs More remembers a nurse saying,
‘There’s nothing more that you can do here, you might as well go home and we will tell you if there is any change.’
Mrs More provided her contact details and told the nurse that they would come back for evening visiting. Mrs More knew that her mother was seriously ill but she did not think that her death was imminent. She did not speak to any doctors or any nurses other than the nurse who advised her to go home.
A short time after she had returned home, Mrs More received news from the hospital that her mother had died. She thinks that the news arrived before 5pm.
Mrs Haigh recalls that she received a telephone call from another sister, Mrs Vera Higginbottom, at about 1.30pm and was told that Mrs Scott had been taken ill and admitted to hospital. Mrs Haigh and her husband then went to PGI and arrived at no later than 3.30pm. By the time they arrived, however, Mrs Scott had died. Mrs Haigh recalls touching her mother’s body and finding that it was still warm.
Medical Evidence
Having reviewed the hospital records and records of the death certification, Professor Baker noted that Mrs Scott was admitted as an emergency at the request of her GP on 10th
May 1972. She had complained of chest pain the night before; Mrs Scott’s GP had been called and morphine had been administered. The next morning, there was still some pain, although initially she had appeared improved. However, she suddenly became much worse, with cyanosis, Cheyne-Stokes respiration and loss of consciousness. That account is reasonably consistent with Mrs More’s recollection.
Professor Baker notes that Shipman was the admitting doctor. In the medical notes, Shipman reported finding constricted pupils, neck stiffness, and upgoing plantar reflexes. An electrocardiogram revealed bundle branch block. A lumbar puncture was performed and the cerebrospinal fluid was reported as initially clear but then becoming bloody. A laboratory report confirmed the presence of blood cells in the cerebrospinal fluid.
Shipman recorded that he attended the patient at 5.20pm on the same day, at which time she had died. He wrote in the records that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident, myocardial infarction, and resected carcinoma of the colon. A letter from the consultant physician, the late Dr Leslie Watson, to Mrs Scott’s GP repeated this history and stated that, at the time of admission, Mrs Scott was suffering a
‘cerebro-vascular catastrophe’
.
The nursing records contain only one entry, made by Mrs Byford.
‘10.5.72 acute admission C/O Dr Watson
H/O Chest pain since yesterday
Collapsed at home this lunch time
O/A cyanosed + + unconscious
Cheyne-Stoke
(
sic
)
respirations pulse
good very rigid
S/B Dr Shipman. L.P.
(
lumbar puncture
)
performed
Airway in situ. 02 + suction
given
Pt’s condition deteriorated
Died 5.20pm. Relatives not present
- informed LB’
.
This is consistent with the evidence of Mrs More and Mrs Haigh save for a discrepancy in the timing. Mrs Byford cannot remember Mrs Scott but has expressed the view that she seems to have been close to death on admission. The entry suggests that Mrs Scott was unconscious on arrival at hospital and never regained consciousness.
Certification
Shipman completed cremation Form B. He stated that death occurred at 5.20pm. Mrs More and Mrs Haigh think that that time is wrong and that the death had occurred some time before then. However, on cremation Form A, which is signed by Mr James Scott (one of Mrs Scott’s sons), it is stated that the death occurred at 5pm and the nursing records suggest that it occurred at 5.20pm. I think it unlikely that Mr Scott would have signed that if he had known or believed that timing to be wrong. I think it is more likely that Mrs More and Mrs Haigh are mistaken as to the time of the death.
On Form B, Shipman said that he had attended Mrs Scott during her last illness for a period of 12 hours. That is plainly wrong. Mrs More’s evidence and the hospital notes both suggest that Mrs Scott was admitted to PGI at about 1.30pm.
Shipman said that he was present at the moment of death, with Sister Byford, and saw the body immediately after death. He claimed to have made a complete examination of the body. He said that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident due to coronary thrombosis. The mode of death was said to be a coma of 12 hours’ duration. Shipman claimed that he could give this information as the result of his own observations. Yet the information was clearly wrong. Mrs Scott had been conscious and speaking at about 12.45pm.
Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain completed Form C. He recorded that he had seen and questioned Shipman and also that he had seen and questioned the nursing staff on Ward 1. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Mrs Byford has no recollection of this death but she accepts that it is quite possible that she was present with Shipman at the moment of death.
Medical Evidence
Professor Baker observed that the patient’s history supported the occurrence of both a myocardial infarction and a cerebrovascular accident. Although the cremation certificate indicated that Shipman was present at the death, together with Sister Byford, there were no other features to raise concerns about Shipman’s actions.
Dr Aneez Esmail, Medical Advisor to the Inquiry, has advised me that the presence of blood in the cerebrospinal fluid confirms the diagnosis of cerebrovascular accident. In fact it strongly suggests that Mrs Scott had a cerebral haemorrhage. That would be consistent with the description given by Mrs More of the episode on the settee at home when Mrs Scott lost consciousness. After such an episode, it would be expected that Mrs Scott would die quite quickly.
Conclusion
Mrs More and Mrs Haigh would like to think that Mrs Scott died peacefully on her own. However, the apparent inaccuracies on cremation Form B and the fact that Shipman stated that he was present at the time of death (albeit with Sister Byford) have planted seeds of doubt in their minds. I understand their concerns but feel able to put their minds at rest. There can be no doubt of the seriousness of the episode, at which Mrs More was present, during which her mother suddenly became unconscious. The lumbar puncture test result confirms that this episode was a cerebral haemorrhage. The death should have been reported to the coroner because it occurred within 24 hours of Mrs Scott's admission to hospital and, in some cases, I am suspicious when no report was made in such circumstances. However, I have explained in
Chapter Seven
that Shipman sometimes sought to avoid reporting a death even when it was entirely natural, possibly for selfish financial reasons, possibly so as to avoid the need for further formalities. In this case, I suspect that he thought no useful purpose would be served by reporting the case, since the lumbar puncture had provided a clear cause of death. In conclusion, although there are inaccuracies in cremation Form B and although the death should have been reported to the coroner but was not, I do not think that Mrs More and Mrs Haigh need feel any concern about Shipman’s role in their mother’s death. I am satisfied that it was natural.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001