The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Edith Mary Swift
Introduction
Mrs Edith Mary Swift died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Sunday, 9th
May 1971 at the age of 49. She had been admitted to PGI two days earlier. Shipman certified that the causes of her death were acute bronchitis and bronchopneumonia. At the time of Mrs Swift’s death, Shipman was a house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Swift’s son, Mr David Alan Swift. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Swift’s hospital records. A post-mortem examination was carried out on Mrs Swift’s body and the post-mortem examination report has been obtained. Mrs Swift was buried; there is no cremation documentation. Professor Richard Baker has considered and commented on the available documents.
Mr Swift has expressed unease about the circumstances of his mother’s death.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mrs Swift was married and had three children, all of whom lived at the family home at the time of her death. She had worked in a sewing factory until about six months before she died. Mr Swift does not think that his mother stopped working at the factory because she was suffering from ill health but rather because she was
‘fed up’
with the job.
Mr Swift, who was aged 21 at the time of his mother’s death, remembers her as an active and busy woman. She had had her thyroid gland partially removed in 1961. Prior to that operation, she had lost a lot of weight but Mr Swift recalls that she made a good recovery and regained the weight that she had lost. Mrs Swift suffered from chronic bronchitis, which was aggravated by seasonal weather changes. Typically, her condition was severe on about two occasions each year, for example at the beginning of the winter or summer season. During such episodes, Mrs Swift’s cough was very bad. The doctor would visit her at home but Mr Swift does not recall that his mother ever required hospital treatment for her bronchitis. He recalls that Mrs Swift smoked four or five cigarettes a day.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
Mr Swift recalls that his mother’s general practitioner (GP) was called to the family home on Friday, 7th
May because Mrs Swift had quite severe breathing problems. Her doctor said that Mrs Swift had bronchitis, should go into hospital for a couple of days and should have oxygen to help with her breathing. Mrs Swift accepted this advice and was taken to PGI at about 8pm. Mr Swift recalls that his father went with Mrs Swift to the hospital and that, when his father returned to the house later that evening, he said that she had been given oxygen and that her condition had significantly improved.
In-Patient Treatment
Mr Swift was unable to visit his mother on Saturday, 8th
May. However, he says that his father went to the hospital in the evening of that day and later said that Mrs Swift was doing very well and that she would probably be able to come home on the following Monday. The family planned to visit Mrs Swift on the afternoon of Sunday, 9th
May.
The hospital records are broadly consistent with these recollections, although the timings are different and they suggest that Mrs Swift’s condition was more serious than Mr Swift now recalls. The admission note, which was made by Shipman at 2pm on 7th
May, recorded that Mrs Swift had started with a cold three days earlier and had become very breathless. She had suffered from bronchitis for 20 years. She was coughing green sputum at the time although her sputum was usually white. It was recorded that she smoked 20 cigarettes a day and worked as a part-time waitress. She was on some regular medication but I am unable to decipher what this was. Shipman recorded that she had never been on steroids. Shipman also recorded that, on examination, Mrs Swift was cyanosed (blue) and short of breath. Her breathing rate was 30 breaths per minute and shallow. That is an abnormally high rate. Air entry was poor and breath sounds were
‘vesicular’
with widespread rhonchi and crepitations all over the chest. The pulse rate was 90, which is quite high, but blood pressure and heart sounds were normal. It seems that abdominal examination was normal. The records were stored on microfiche and recovery has been imperfect. However, I can see that Shipman diagnosed a chest infection and bronchitis. He prescribed a range of drugs, including antibiotics, aminophylline, Lasix, salbutamol and oxygen. A different doctor appears to have prescribed streptomycin, another antibiotic, to be given by intramuscular injection. The medical records for 8th
May record that Mrs Swift was much improved on that day.
The nursing records refer to the treatment given and report that Mrs Swift slept for only short periods on the night of 7th
to 8th
May. On 8th
May, it is recorded that she was complaining of headache and she was described as
‘noisy’
. Dr Aneez Esmail, Medical Advisor to the Inquiry, has advised me that patients can sometimes be unsettled and ‘noisy’ when they are suffering from severe chest infections and the oxygen supply to the brain is impaired.
The Day of the Death
The nursing notes for the night of 8th
to 9th
May state:
‘Mogadon tab
(
this symbol signifies that the medication was given at night
)
given 11PM commenced on Phenobarb
(
itone
)
30
(illegible)
TDS.
(
three times a day
)
Became very noisy and confused, singing and getting out of bed. Later settled and slept well. Very breathless at times. Collapsed, and died 7AM’
.
This entry records that Mrs Swift had a disturbed night. She was given Mogadon at 11pm on 8th
May. The dose is not stated. Mogadon is a brand name for nitrazepam, which is a benzodiazepine and is often prescribed for insomnia. The earliest British National Formulary (BNF) available to the Inquiry is that from 1974-76, which gave the following advice in relation to nitrazepam:
‘It may cause respiratory depression which is a danger in patients with bronchitis and emphysema’
. The entry also suggests that phenobarbitone was given, probably 30mg. That drug is used as an anticonvulsant or sedative. No specific warning was given in the BNF for 1974-76 in relation to prescribing phenobarbitone to patients with respiratory problems, but advice given in later versions of the BNF is that the drug should be avoided in cases of severe respiratory depression. Dr Esmail has confirmed that, in the 1970s, there was less awareness of the risks associated with phenobarbitone than there is now. The prescription chart shows that it was Shipman who prescribed both Mogadon and phenobarbitone (both to be taken orally) for Mrs Swift.
An entry in the clinical record, also dated 9th
May, was made by Shipman as follows:
‘0705 called to patient
Patient died 0655
(
words crossed out
)
was confused in night
but slept well.
(
words crossed out
)
PM
(
post-mortem examination
)
asked for
complete examination’
.
The evidence received by the Inquiry is that the doctor on call over the weekend was on call from 9am on the Friday until 5pm on the Monday. It seems that Shipman was on call over the weekend of Mrs Swift’s death.
At about 8am or 9am on the morning of Sunday, 9th
May, the police called at the family home to say that Mrs Swift had died. The family was very shocked.
Post-Mortem Examination
A post-mortem examination was carried out by the late Dr E L Simons, consultant pathologist, on 10th
May 1971, the day after the death. His findings in the lungs were as follows:
‘haemorrhagic oedema right more than left with suggestion of consolidation in areas 2 cm. across. Bronchi contained blood-stained fluid.’
In the left lung he found
‘dense old pleural adhesions over whole surface’
. He recorded that the causes of death were acute bronchitis and bronchopneumonia. Post-mortem histology of the lungs showed chronic bronchitis and areas of bronchopneumonia. The bronchopneumonia was said to consist of
‘a few alveoli only’
.
Further Evidence
Mr Swift remembers attending PGI on Monday, 10th
May. He was told by one of the nurses that she could not understand how Mrs Swift had died. He remembers being told that she was apparently up and about and drinking tea with the nurses at 1am on the Sunday morning. She was able to walk around the ward and, after drinking her cup of tea, had returned to bed. That account is not inconsistent with the evidence from the records that Mrs Swift had had a disturbed night. Although it appears from the nursing record that Mrs Swift was given Mogadon and phenobarbitone at the same time, at about 11pm, it seems quite likely that the nurses gave her Mogadon at bedtime and phenobarbitone later in the night to help her to settle after she had been up drinking tea. It seems unlikely that, if Mogadon and phenobarbitone had been given at the same time, Mrs Swift would have stayed awake and been out of bed drinking tea.
Mr Swift says that the nurses told him that his mother had been found dead in bed at about 7am. He recalls that one of the nurses said to him that she thought Mrs Swift had choked to death because she had been coughing so much. Mr Swift has said in a statement that the account given to him by the nurses did not seem to him to
‘add up’
. He cannot understand how his mother could have choked to death and why nobody had heard or assisted her.
In a letter dated 13th
May 1971, Dr Warren Jordan, the consultant chest physician in charge of Mrs Swift’s care, wrote to her GP in the following terms:
‘When Mrs. Swift was admitted to hospital on the 7th
of this month she was found to have bronchopneumonia, her temperature being elevated to 39° C. The white blood count showed a well marked leucocytosis and the white cells were almost entirely neutrophils, suggesting a severe bacterial infection. We treated the patient intensively with anti-bacterial drugs and initially she improved both clinically and as far as the white blood count was concerned and then suddenly died on the 10th
of this month. Dr. Simons’ opinion of the cause of death agreed with the clinical findings.’
Medical Evidence
Professor Baker reviewed Mrs Swift’s hospital records and observed that she had a severe respiratory infection. Shipman’s initial management of the patient had been reviewed by a more senior doctor. Professor Baker noted that Mrs Swift had collapsed and died fairly suddenly and, on the basis that there was nothing in the records to indicate that the terminal collapse was preceded by attendance by Shipman, concluded that the records did not give rise to concern about Shipman’s actions.
Dr Esmail has also commented on the hospital records and, in particular, upon the administration of Mogadon and phenobarbitone during the night of 8th
to 9th
May. He is of the view that Mrs Swift was hypoxic as the result of her severe chest infection and that this accounts for the description, given in the nursing notes, that she was noisy and confused. In his view, to give 30mg phenobarbitone to a patient in Mrs Swift’s condition was dangerous, as the drug would depress her respiration.
Conclusion
It is clear from the hospital records and the report of the post-mortem examination that Mrs Swift was suffering from bronchopneumonia and was still very poorly on 8th
May, despite the recorded improvement in her condition that day. It is entirely possible that Mrs Swift died only as the result of bronchopneumonia and that her treatment did not hasten her death. On the other hand, there is some cause for suspicion that Mrs Swift’s treatment may have caused or accelerated her death.
On 8th
May, Shipman prescribed Mogadon and phenobarbitone for Mrs Swift. It appears to me that the most likely course of events was that Mrs Swift was given a Mogadon tablet at bedtime but that she remained confused and unsettled and kept getting out of bed. It appears likely that, in the small hours, the nurses gave Mrs Swift a cup of tea and the phenobarbitone tablet that Shipman had prescribed. That had the desired effect of helping her to sleep but may also have had the effect of depressing her respiration and causing her death, which was regarded as sudden by Mr Jordan.
There is no evidence that Shipman gave the phenobarbitone himself, only that he prescribed it. I cannot say with complete confidence whether he knew that phenobarbitone was dangerous for a patient suffering from impaired respiratory function. That danger was not generally recognised at the time. The fact that he prescribed both drugs quite openly suggests that he was not aware of the danger although I suspect that, even in 1971, Shipman was more aware than most of the properties of such drugs. There is certainly no evidence to suggest that the nursing staff were aware of any risk. They gave Mrs Swift the phenobarbitone, no doubt believing that it would help to settle her down to sleep. It seems to me quite likely that the phenobarbitone depressed Mrs Swift’s already impaired respiratory function and contributed to her death. My conclusion is that there is some cause to suspect that Shipman prescribed phenobarbitone for Mrs Swift, being reckless as to its likely effect upon her.
I very much regret that I have had to raise these doubts so many years after the death and I am sorry for the distress this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI, once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001