The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Irene Turner
Introduction
Mrs Irene Turner died on 11th
July 1996 at the age of 67. Her body was exhumed in 1998 and the levels of morphine found in her body tissues were consistent with the administration of a fatal dose.
Personal Background
For some years before her death, Mrs Turner suffered from non-insulin dependent diabetes and arterial disease. She had had breast cancer and had suffered a heart attack in 1994. Notwithstanding that, she led a full and active life and appeared to friends and family to be generally quite well. She had been to Torquay for a week's holiday just before her death. On her return, she developed a cold and was bringing up phlegm, which had caused her to vomit. Her daughter and son-in-law, Mrs Carol and Mr Michael Woodruff, advised her to call the doctor.
The Circumstances of the Death
On 11th
July, Mrs Turner rang Shipman's surgery to ask for a visit. She stayed in bed. She asked Mr Woodruff to bring a meat and potato pie in for her lunch. When he arrived, she said she would eat it when the doctor had been. At 2.15pm, Mrs Turner telephoned Mr Woodruff and said that the doctor had not yet been. She must have been in the living room at that time to use the telephone. That was her last communication.
Mrs Sheila Ward, a neighbour, said that, at about 3.25pm, she saw Shipman in his car in the road. He asked her to go into Mrs Turner's house. He told her to wait for about five minutes before going in. He gave no reason why she should delay. When she went in, she found Mrs Turner dead in bed. She was lying on the bed, with her head on the pillows and her arms outside the bedclothes, which came up to her chest. Shipman arrived and told her that Mrs Turner had died of diabetes. It was all through her body and it had been too late to send her to hospital.
Shipman told Mr Woodruff that there was no need for a post-mortem examination. He had told Mrs Turner that she should go to hospital but she had not liked the idea. He was cold and matter of fact.
Shipman told Mr Alfred Isherwood, another son-in-law, that Mrs Turner had not looked after her diabetes. He said she had died of ischaemic heart disease. He gave a very complicated explanation of her supposed condition. He said Mrs Turner would not have suffered any pain; she would just have gone to sleep. He was cold and businesslike. He said Mrs Turner had not wished to go to hospital. Mr Isherwood thought that was strange as Mrs Turner held Shipman in high regard and would always accept his advice. Shipman blamed Mrs Turner for leaving it until so late before she called the doctor. He said she would have survived if she had called him earlier.
The Defence Case
Shipman's account, which must have been disbelieved by the jury, was that, when he arrived, Mrs Turner was very poorly. She told him that she had been vomiting for five to six days and may have vomited her diabetes tablets. He thought her diabetes was out of control and that she was dehydrated. He told her she ought to go to hospital but she would not agree. She told him that, in the past, she had been worse than she then was and she had recovered without telling him. Eventually, she agreed to go into hospital if her urine showed both blood and protein, so he took a sample and left. He was confident that the results would show a serious situation, so he told her to get ready for hospital and suggested that he should ask her neighbour, Mrs Ward, to come in. He left and saw Mrs Ward outside. He asked her go to Mrs Turner in a few minutes, by which time Mrs Turner would have been to the lavatory. He told her he would be back shortly. He went to the surgery and did the test, which was positive, so he went straight back to the house. He was away only ten minutes. He found Mrs Turner unconscious. He felt for a pulse, examined her eyes and concluded that she was dead. He considered that the cause of death was failure of the peripheral circulation.
Certification
Shipman signed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), giving the date of death as 10th
July and purporting to sign it on 10th
June 1996. He gave the cause as circulatory failure, with ischaemic heart disease and diabetes mellitus as underlying conditions. Hypertension was a contributory factor.
The Expert Evidence
The post-mortem examination revealed signs of diabetes, coronary artery disease and past heart attacks. These conditions were severe enough to account for a sudden death. However, the morphine levels found in the tissue samples were consistent with a fatal dose and, in Dr John Rutherford's view, morphine was the cause of death. From the post-mortem examination findings and a perusal of the medical records, it appeared to him that both the diabetes and hypertension were well controlled.
The Medical Records
The medical records revealed a complicated medical history, which it is not necessary to record. With reference to the death, Shipman had made a handwritten account of his final visit, although it was mistakenly dated 10th
June 1996. This account was plainly designed to lend plausibility to the cause of death he had given. The note suggested that he had found Mrs Turner to be very ill. She had been vomiting for four days. She had a fever, dysuria and was dehydrated. He thought she was in circulatory collapse. There was tenderness over the kidneys. She was acidotic. He had prescribed amoxycillin, an antibiotic. He had taken a urine sample and had left. On his return, he had found her dead from the causes which appeared on the MCCD.
Dr John Grenville did not think this note made medical sense. He said that, if the note were accurate, it showed a woman in urgent need of hospital admission for intravenous rehydration and control of the diabetes. She was a medical emergency. There should have been no delay. It was inappropriate to prescribe amoxycillin or to take away a urine sample for testing. The doctor should have called an ambulance. If the patient had refused to go to hospital, he should have warned her of the risk of imminent death and should have summoned a relative who could persuade her. Failing all else, he should have asked her to confirm her objection in writing. Dr Grenville doubted the feasibility of obtaining a urine sample from Mrs Turner if she was as dehydrated as the note suggested. He observed that the urine test was not recorded in the notes. Dr Grenville doubted that Mrs Turner was as ill as Shipman claimed. She would have looked very ill and would not have been interested in food. Shipman's case did not add up.
Shipman claimed that the handwritten record was made while he was at Mrs Turner's house. The computerised records, which Shipman claimed he had made on his return to the surgery that evening or the next morning, were different in many respects from the written record. For 11th
July, there are several separate entries which say:
'Had a chat to patient
very ill not happy re hosp'
.
'Had a chat to patient
circulatory failure bs 20
(
blood sugar 20, which is very high. Shipman claimed that Mrs Turner had taken this reading herself on her glucometer
)
'
.
'Examination of patient
100/60 cold? uti tluk
(
to let us know
)
'
.
'O/E – dead
1540 circ fail dm ihd//hyperte
(
on examination dead; circulatory failure, diabetes mellitus ischaemic heart disease//hyptertension
)
'
.
'Seen in own home
Dr H.F.Shipman'
.
Shipman was quite unable to explain the many inconsistencies between the handwritten and computerised records. It was not possible to establish from objective evidence when either record was made.
Comment
This was a proven case of morphine poisoning. However, if one takes that factor out of the equation, there remain several factors which are common to other cases:
This was a very sudden death of a patient who did not appear to others to be seriously ill on the day of death. However, she had underlying conditions which could have resulted in her sudden death at any time. Shipman's victims often had potentially fatal conditions, which he relied on as a plausible cause of death.
Shipman claimed that he found Mrs Turner to be seriously ill and that she refused admission to hospital. This is a common feature in many Shipman killings. Shipman left her alone, supposedly in a serious condition. She was found dead very shortly afterwards. It would have been a remarkable coincidence if she had died naturally during the few intervening minutes.
Shipman's account of his treatment of Mrs Turner was inappropriate. In order to explain the course of events, he was driven to give an account of his actions which, if true, would have shown him to be seriously incompetent. This is a common feature of Shipman killings.
Shipman's two sets of records of the events preceding the death were woefully inadequate and were mutually inconsistent. It was accepted that Shipman was a poor record keeper and this is amply demonstrated in very many cases.
The body gave the appearance of having been 'laid out'. So neat and tidy an appearance is not typical of an unattended death from natural causes. Other examples of this feature have emerged from the Inquiry's investigations.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001