The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Tomlin
Introduction
Mrs Mary Tomlin (known as Molly) died on Tuesday, 7th
October 1986 at her home, a first floor maisonette at 33 Thorpe Hall Grove, Hyde at the age of 73. She was a widow and lived alone. She and her family held Shipman in high regard. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's conviction, Mrs Tomlin's daughter, Mrs Mary Pauline Fernley, contacted the police expressing concern over the manner of Mrs Tomlin's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Fernley and two home helps, Mrs Dorothy Foley and Mrs Elizabeth Christina Shawcross. An inquest into the death of Mrs Tomlin was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Fernley, Mr Ronald Fernley (her husband), Mrs Foley and Mrs Shawcross. Mrs Tomlin's medical records have not survived. The Inquiry has, however, obtained Shipman's visits book for 1986.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Fernley and her husband used to visit Mrs Tomlin every Wednesday and Sunday. Mrs Tomlin had long-standing problems with osteoporosis, bronchitis and possibly cirrhosis of the liver, but she seemed well when the Fernleys visited on Sunday, 5th
October 1986. Mrs Foley and Mrs Shawcross describe Mrs Tomlin as a 'smashing lady' and a 'lovely, jolly' person.
The Day of the Death
On the day of her death, Mrs Tomlin was visited by Mrs Shawcross and Mrs Foley. They arrived at Mrs Tomlin's flat just before lunchtime and found her unwell. She was sitting up in bed in her nightdress. When asked by the police, neither was able to remember what exactly had been wrong with Mrs Tomlin. Mrs Tomlin told them that she had called out her doctor, Shipman, and that she was expecting a visit from him. No intention to visit is recorded in Shipman's visits book.
Mrs Shawcross and Mrs Foley stayed with Mrs Tomlin for a while. They smoked cigarettes together and chatted. Mrs Tomlin seemed quite cheerful. She was looking forward to Shipman's visit. She regarded him as a friend. After a short time, the home helps left to continue with their rounds. It was the home helps' usual practice to visit their clients while the doctor was with them to see if they needed a prescription to be picked up. They told Mrs Tomlin they would keep an eye out for the doctor and go back and see her when he arrived.
Shortly afterwards, Mrs Foley saw Shipman go into Mrs Tomlin's flat. About ten minutes later, she made her way to Mrs Tomlin's flat where she was met by Shipman who appeared at the top of the stairs. Shipman said to her, 'Go and put the kettle on, we'll ring the family, she's going.'
Mrs Foley asked Shipman what he meant, to which he replied, 'She's going, I'll just go and have a look at her.' Shipman then went into the bedroom and Mrs Foley went into the living room. Shortly afterwards, Shipman came through into the living room and told Mrs Foley that Mrs Tomlin was dead. Mrs Foley was very upset, as was Mrs Shawcross when she arrived. Shipman said to the home helps that Mrs Tomlin had been a very poorly and lonely lady and that every day had been a bonus. He did not summon an ambulance. Nor did he make any attempt at resuscitation.
Between 2pm and 3pm that day, Mrs Fernley received a telephone call from Mrs Shawcross who informed her that her mother had died. Mrs Fernley and her husband went to see Mrs Tomlin. They saw that she was in bed, dressed in her nightclothes. She was propped up by pillows and looked as if she had been reading but had fallen asleep. Whilst they would not normally have expected her to go to bed during the day, they assumed that she had done so because she had been unwell.
The Aftermath
Mrs Fernley's recollection is that on the following day, when she attended the surgery to collect the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), Shipman told her that her mother had died of old age. However, it is possible that she may be mistaken about this, as she was in a state of shock. In any event, Shipman stated the cause of death to be coronary thrombosis. He also said that chronic bronchitis had been a significant condition contributing to the death but not related to its immediate cause.
Due to the lapse of time since the death, neither the MCCD nor the medical records are available. There is an MCCD counterfoil but this bears only Mrs Tomlin's name and the date of her death and is incompletely filled in.
Certification
Shipman said on Form B of the cremation certificate that the death occurred at
'1415hrs'
, that he saw the body immediately after death and that he attended Mrs Tomlin for half an hour during her final illness. The mode of death was
'syncope'
of 10 to 15 minutes' duration. He claimed to know this of his own knowledge and from what the
'Home Help'
had told him. He said that he and a home help were present at the moment of death. Had the home helps been shown Form B, they no doubt would have been able to say that neither of them was present at the time of death nor had they any knowledge of the period of time in which Mrs Tomlin was in syncope.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker regarded the death as highly suspicious on the basis of the contents of Form B.
Conclusion
The circumstances of Mrs Tomlin's death are very similar to those of Miss Mona White, whom Shipman had killed only three weeks earlier. The two women lived in the same road.
This death is plainly highly suspicious. Although Mrs Tomlin was unwell when the home helps visited her shortly before her death, she was chatting and smoking. Within an hour, Shipman had told Mrs Foley that she was dying. I recognise that people can and do suffer heart attacks without warning and may die suddenly. But, if Shipman is right, Mrs Tomlin must have suffered a heart attack within that short time. As with Miss Mona White and many others, the coincidence is utterly remarkable. In my view, it is so remarkable that it cannot be true. Further, Shipman's conduct was not appropriate in respect of a patient suffering from heart attack. He should have called an ambulance and if the patient went into cardiac arrest, he should have attempted resuscitation. Heart attack is usually a painful process but Mrs Tomlin appeared simply to have fallen asleep propped up in bed. This appearance in death is entirely typical of deaths caused by Shipman by means of morphine injection.
Despite the lack of medical records and my consequent inability to discover whether Mrs Tomlin was suffering from heart disease before her death, I am sure that this death was caused by Shipman. The circumstances allow no other plausible explanation.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001