The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Beatrice Toft
Introduction
Mrs Beatrice Toft died at her home, 24 Marler Road, Hyde on Monday, 17th
November 1986 at the age of 59. She was a patient of Shipman and thought highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was respiratory failure caused by chronic bronchitis with emphysema.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions, one of Mrs Toft's daughters, Ms Andrea Elizabeth Fearns, contacted the police expressing concern about the circumstances of Mrs Toft's death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Patricia Margaret Clayton (Mrs Toft's eldest daughter). An inquest into Mrs Toft's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken two further statements from Mrs Clayton. The Inquiry has also taken statements from Ms Judith Alyson Toft, Ms Janice Helen Toft and Ms Fearns (three of Mrs Toft's daughters), Mr Christopher David Toft (her son) and Mrs Margaret Mary Davies (her home help). Mrs Clayton, Ms Judith Toft, Ms Janice Toft and Ms Fearns gave oral evidence at a hearing on Tuesday, 3rd
July 2001. The Inquiry has had access to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, the cremation forms and Shipman's visits book for 1986. Mrs Toft's medical records have not survived.
The Inquiry has obtained a report from Dr John Grenville, who gave oral evidence at a hearing on Monday, 23rd
July 2001.
Personal Background
Mrs Toft lived in a ground floor flat in sheltered accommodation, supervised by a warden. She was separated from her husband. Her granddaughter, who was about 16, often stayed with her. Mrs Toft had moved to this flat in February 1986 because she suffered from emphysema and chronic bronchitis and had difficulty in breathing. She was a heavy smoker. On occasions, she became very short of breath and had been provided with an oxygen cylinder for use at such times. Her family thought that these episodes were panic attacks. However, I think it unlikely that Mrs Toft would have been provided with an oxygen supply on account of panic attacks. I think she must have been suffering from quite severe breathing difficulties. Probably when acutely breathless, Mrs Toft would panic and this might account for the family's impression that her episodes of breathlessness were panic attacks. If she needed help, Mrs Toft was able to summon the warden by pulling an emergency cord. There was such a cord just above her bed. There had been at least two occasions during her residence in the flat when the warden had been summoned. On those occasions, the warden had telephoned Mrs Clayton, who lived not far away. Mrs Clayton had then accompanied her mother to hospital, where she had spent a few days.
The Inquiry heard evidence from Mrs Toft's family about her state of health in the weeks before her death. It has not been possible to check the accuracy of these recollections against the medical records, as these have not survived. However, it is clear that Mrs Toft spent a lot of time in her bed, which had been moved into the living room. She would rarely dress in day clothes, feeling more comfortable in a nightdress. She lay for much of the day propped up on a pile of about four pillows. This was the position in which she found it easiest to breathe. When she slept, she turned onto her side but stayed on the pile of pillows.
Mrs Toft was assisted by a home help and had meals on wheels delivered most days. She also received a great deal of assistance from her family, who visited very frequently. Mrs Clayton called twice or three times each day. Mrs Toft was capable of making herself a drink or a snack and bathing herself but otherwise undertook little activity. However, she enjoyed the company of visitors. The family says that she was not made breathless by talking.
When members of the family gave evidence, they recalled that, in the months in which Mrs Toft had been living at her flat, Shipman had visited her on only two occasions. They said that these visits were unsolicited and had occurred soon after visits to or stays in hospital. If Mrs Toft needed a repeat prescription, for example for an oxygen cylinder, Mrs Clayton would telephone the surgery. However, it now seems that those recollections are not accurate. Since the hearing, the Inquiry has recovered Shipman's personal visits book, which he took with him on his rounds. The book for 1986 shows that he had been visiting Mrs Toft fairly regularly during the six months before her death. He appears to have visited once in April, twice in May, once in July, three times in September and twice in October. In November, he visited three times in the week before Mrs Toft's death, on the Tuesday, Wednesday and Friday. The frequency of those visits, if they occurred, would suggest that Mrs Toft was more unwell than usual. Mrs Clayton, who was asked to comment on the content of the visits book, accepts that Shipman must have visited her mother quite regularly in the months before her death and suggests that she must have been unaware of these visits, as she would have been at work. I think it is highly likely that Shipman visited fairly regularly, as the visits book suggests. A patient who needs oxygen must require some supervision. It is inevitable that my confidence in the accuracy of the recollections of Mrs Toft's daughters has been slightly shaken. They had all originally asserted that Shipman did not visit their mother regularly.
More crucial is the evidence relating to Mrs Toft's condition in the week or so before her death. Her daughters said that they were quite unaware of any deterioration in their mother's health. They said they were unaware of any visits shortly before the death and were not expecting Shipman to call on the day of the death. Now that Mrs Clayton has seen Shipman's visits book, she adamantly refuses to accept that Shipman visited three times in the week before the death. She completely rejects the suggestion that her mother's health had deteriorated at that time. She is prepared to accept that one of those visits might have taken place, as a matter of routine. However, she suggests that the entries representing the other two visits must have been fabricated to make it appear that Mrs Toft was more ill than she really was. Mrs Clayton asserts that if her mother had been so ill as to require three visits from the doctor, she would have stayed off work to look after her. She says that she would have known if the doctor had been summoned, as Mrs Toft would have had to ask either one of her daughters or the warden to call him. Mrs Toft had no telephone at her flat. Mrs Clayton says she would have remembered had any such request for a visit been made. The family also claimed that Mrs Toft did not like to be alone when the doctor was coming. Presumably they would say that if Shipman had visited three times in one week, arrangements would have been made to ensure that one of the daughters was present.
It is difficult for me to reach any satisfactory conclusion about the accuracy of Shipman's visits book. I have come across many cases where Shipman has fabricated entries in the medical records but no case in which I have suspected that he fabricated entries in his visits book. I accept it is quite possible that he did. If he had decided to fabricate an entry in the medical records, he might well have made up a corresponding entry in the visits book. However, it seems unlikely that he would bother to do so, as I do not think his visits book was intended to be a complete record of all the patients he visited. I am left in a state of uncertainty as to Mrs Toft's health in the week before her death.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of Monday, 17th
November, Mrs Clayton called on her mother as usual, soon after 9am. She found her sitting in bed, propped up by pillows. Mrs Clayton said in evidence that her mother seemed much as usual and Mrs Clayton saw no reason to be particularly concerned about her. There was no discussion about calling the doctor and no reason to expect that Shipman would visit of his own volition. I am uncertain as to whether I can accept that evidence. If Shipman had visited Mrs Toft three times in the previous week, it is highly likely that he would have promised to call in after the weekend. There is an entry in his visits book which suggests that he intended to do so.
At about midday, Mrs Toft's lunch was delivered by the meals on wheels service. It was her habit to eat the main course but to leave the pudding, which she did not usually like.
Mrs Clayton returned to her mother's flat at about 4.20pm with her daughter, Suzanne. The flat was in darkness, which was most unusual, as Mrs Toft always kept the electric light on in her room both day and night. The television was on. Mrs Toft was lying flat on her back on her bed with her head on a single pillow. The others had been pushed away. This again was unusual. So also were the position of her arms and the arrangement of the bedclothes. For sleeping or resting, Mrs Toft would usually turn onto her side and pull the blankets over her shoulders. On this occasion, the covers were folded neatly up to her chest and her arms were on top. The container in which her lunch had been delivered was beside her. She had eaten the main course but left the pudding as usual. Her mouth was open but her dentures were not inside. That was another unusual feature, as the family said they had never seen Mrs Clayton without them. She had upper and lower dentures and kept them in, even at night.
Mrs Clayton realised that something was wrong and rang for an ambulance. When the ambulance arrived, the paramedics confirmed that Mrs Toft was dead. Shipman was called.
Mrs Clayton contacted her three sisters, who hastened to the scene. The Inquiry heard the evidence of all four daughters. The following account is taken from the evidence of all.
Shipman did not examine Mrs Toft. He just looked at her and told Mrs Clayton that he had seen her mother at 2.30pm that afternoon and she had been fine. He told the paramedics that they could go, which they did. He told the daughters that Mrs Toft's heart had given up and that the emphysema had stopped her lungs working. Ms Fearns asked where her mother's false teeth were, as they were not in sight. Shipman suggested that Mrs Toft had probably swallowed them. They were never found. Ms Judith Toft went to put her arms round her mother to give her a hug and the warden, who had by this time arrived, told her not to do this. Shipman intervened and told the warden to leave her alone. Ms Judith Toft kissed her mother's face. In her statement she said that her mother felt 'cold and leathery'. In evidence she said that her mother did not feel normal and she 'could tell that she had gone.' Shipman advised Mrs Clayton to call an undertaker and told the family that a post-mortem examination was not needed, as he had seen Mrs Toft earlier in the day.
The family said that there was no sign that Mrs Toft had attempted to summon the warden. As the warden attended after the death, it is fair to assume that she would have told the family if Mrs Toft had summoned her at any time during the day. The family also noted that there was no sign that Mrs Toft had attempted to reach for her oxygen mask.
Mrs Clayton had drawn her mother's weekly benefit that morning, which amounted to about £35. She had given the money to her mother, who had put it in her purse as usual. Mrs Toft usually kept her purse by her in bed. However, after the death, the purse was found on a coffee table some little way from the bed and, apart from some small change, it was empty.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate has not survived, its counterfoil is available and shows that Shipman certified the cause of death as respiratory failure caused by chronic bronchitis with emphysema. He said he had last seen Mrs Toft alive on the day of her death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that the death had occurred at 5pm, although this seems to have been his second estimate; the other has been crossed out and is illegible. This estimate is almost certainly wrong. Every member of the family is adamant that they were aware of the death before 5pm. Unfortunately, the ambulance records are no longer available so it has not been possible to check the time at which the death was discovered. However, I do have confidence in the recollections of the family of the circumstances immediately surrounding the death. I am satisfied that the death had occurred well before 5pm. On Form B Shipman said that he saw the body about one hour after the death and carried out a complete external examination. The evidence shows that he did not examine the body at all. He said that the mode of death was syncope of only seconds' duration. This must have been intended as an assumption, as he also stated that no one was present at the death. He claimed that he had answered the questions relating to the cause and mode of death from his own observations and from the statements made by 'daughters'. As none of the daughters was present at the death, they could not have told him anything about the mode or duration of the death. He also said that Mrs Toft had been nursed by
'daughters and D/N'
during her last illness. It is thought that 'D/N' must be a reference to the district nurse. All Mrs Toft's daughters say that they were unaware of any involvement by the district nursing service. However, it is possible that they have forgotten. If the description of the services rendered by the family is accurate, it does not appear to me that these could properly be described as nursing. However, I am not sufficiently sure of the accuracy of that aspect of the family's evidence to assert that this entry on Form B must be a lie. In summary, this Form B, like so many others completed by Shipman, contained a number of inaccuracies and falsehoods, which appear to me to be designed to distance him from the death and to allay any possible suspicion that he might have been connected with it.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville said he did not think that Mrs Toft could have died of respiratory failure. She had not reached the terminal stages of her illness. A death from chronic bronchitis and emphysema is preceded by a long, slow, gradual deterioration usually ending with an acute event, which may be respiratory (such as a chest infection), cardiac or cardiovascular. Dr Grenville observed that it did not appear that Mrs Toft had had any illness such as a chest infection. He said that if there is no acute event, the decline towards death is usually very protracted. Towards the end, the patient would not be able to move about or wash him- or herself. He or she would require oxygen frequently and for long periods. Usually, 24 hour care would be required. Often, the patient lapses into hypoxic unconsciousness before death. Mrs Toft cannot have been at the terminal stage. She would not have eaten lunch and she most certainly could not have been described by Shipman as being 'fine' at the time of his visit that day.
At the time when Dr Grenville wrote his report and expressed his opinion, he was not aware of the contents of Shipman's visits book and the possibility or even likelihood that Shipman had visited three times in the week before the death. Those visits might suggest that Mrs Toft had indeed suffered a chest infection. In my view, therefore, Dr Grenville's statement that there had not been an acute chest infection must be qualified to the extent that Mrs Toft might have had one in the previous week.
Dr Grenville considered other possible causes of sudden death. He accepted that Mrs Toft was at risk of a sudden cardiac death but observed that there was no sign that this had occurred. Mrs Toft's appearance in death was quite inconsistent with a death from heart attack. Had she felt ill, she would have pulled the cord to summon the warden and would almost certainly have reached for her oxygen mask. She could not have lain herself flat and have arranged the covers neatly. In any event, it would have been a remarkable coincidence if Mrs Toft had suffered a fatal heart attack so very short a time after Shipman's visit.
Dr Grenville also said that he had never come across a case in which a patient had swallowed both dentures. He could imagine that the dentures of a patient who was falling into unconsciousness might become dislodged and fall back into the throat. But he could not see how they could disappear unless they were removed by someone. He postulated the theory that Shipman might have had an experience that made him consider it prudent to remove the dentures of someone to whom he had given a lethal injection.
Conclusion
Mrs Toft was plainly in poor health in the weeks and months before her death. It is possible that she had not long to live. I think it is likely (although I cannot be certain) that Mrs Toft had been more unwell than usual in the week before she died. I think it likely that Shipman visited her on the Tuesday and found her quite poorly, so poorly as to warrant a visit the following day. I think he must have then found her at least to some extent improved, as Mrs Toft was not admitted to hospital and Shipman did not consider it necessary to visit on the Thursday. I think he probably visited again on the Friday and found her improved. I infer that no admission was necessary and Shipman promised to come on the Monday. I think that, by the Monday, Mrs Toft was well enough to be left at home on her own while her daughters went about their usual business. Her daughters were very attentive to her needs and, had she been ill, one of them would have been with her. I am satisfied that she was alone that day, when Shipman visited. It is possible that I am wrong in my conclusion that Shipman probably did visit three times in the previous week. It is possible that the family is right when they assert that Mrs Toft was not more unwell than usual and the three visits did not take place. In the event, as I am satisfied that Mrs Toft was well enough to be left alone on the Monday, it does not matter greatly whether she had been unwell in the previous week.
Dr Grenville has said that a death from respiratory failure usually follows either an acute chest infection, heart attack or stroke. I am satisfied that, if Mrs Toft had a chest infection in the previous week, she had to all intents and purposes recovered from it by the Monday. I am satisfied too, that she had not undergone the kind of gradual decline described by Dr Grenville. It follows that I think it very unlikely that Mrs Toft died of respiratory failure as Shipman claimed.
I accept that Mrs Toft could have died suddenly from a heart attack. However, if she did, she could not have arranged herself in the bed in the position in which she was found. I rule that out as implausible.
This death is highly suspicious as it was discovered so shortly after a visit by Shipman. No one saw Mrs Toft alive after his visit. If Mrs Toft died a natural death in the short period that elapsed between Shipman's departure and the arrival of Mrs Clayton, this would be a real coincidence. This is the kind of coincidence that hardly ever happens to other doctors but, if he is to be believed, happened to Shipman very frequently.
Shipman's entries on Form B also give rise to suspicion. He has given the impression that the death was later than it really was. I am satisfied that he did this in order to increase the interval between his visit and the death. His suggestion that some information about the mode of death has come from a daughter must have been intended to create the impression that someone else had some knowledge of the circumstances, when, in truth, he was the only one who knew anything about the death.
I find the suggestion that Mrs Toft could have swallowed both dentures utterly incredible. It appears likely to me that someone removed them. I also think that Mrs Toft's position in bed must have been the result of someone arranging her. Shipman was the last person to see Mrs Toft alive. All the known facts are explicable if one considers what he might have done. He visited Mrs Toft; whether by arrangement or not, does not matter. He would have been able to gain access as the door was usually left unlocked. Mrs Toft would not be alarmed to see him, as she knew him well. It would not be difficult for him to persuade her that she needed an injection of some sort. Once she was unconscious, he could have arranged her body neatly with her arms on the covers and moved the pillows back. He could have removed her dentures. When he left, he must have switched the light off. He would not have known that Mrs Toft slept with her teeth in and the light on. I think this is what must have happened. Why he took the teeth out is something of a mystery, although Dr Grenville has suggested that Shipman might have had an alarming experience on another occasion, when a denture might possibly have become lodged in a patient's throat, so that on future occasions he thought it prudent to remove them. I have come across a number of Shipman killings in which the dentures of the deceased patient had been removed from the mouth, but none in which they had disappeared altogether.
Although Mrs Toft was not in good health at the time of her death and although a sudden cardiac death was possible, I am sure that Shipman was responsible for her death. Although the circumstances arouse a suspicion that Shipman took Mrs Toft's money, I do not feel able to reach a firm conclusion on that issue.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001