The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Angela Philomena Tierney
Introduction
Mrs Angela Philomena Tierney died at her home, 26 Commercial Street, Hyde on Monday, 10th
April 1995 at the age of 71. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought that he was a good doctor. He certified that the cause of her death was left ventricular failure due to congestive heart failure.
On 14th
October 1998, Mrs Tierney's daughter, Mrs Sheila Ann Caldecott, contacted the police expressing concern about her mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Caldecott, from Mrs Mary Teresa Riley and Mrs Angela Elizabeth Shenton (Mrs Tierney's other daughters), from Mr Michael Tierney and Mr Patrick Anthony Tierney (Mrs Tierney's sons) and from Mr Nicholas John Luty (a funeral director).
Shipman was not prosecuted in respect of Mrs Tierney's death but an inquest into her death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Caldecott, Mr Michael Tierney, Mr Patrick Tierney, Mrs Riley and her husband, Mr Michael Riley. In addition, the Inquiry has had access to Mrs Tierney's general practitioner and hospital records, and to appointments books, visits books, the duty doctor diary and other practice documentation for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Tierney was born with a 'hole in the heart' which gave rise to problems for much of her life. Her medical records show that, in 1977, when registered with another doctor, she began to suffer angina and, in 1979, she underwent open heart surgery to close the defect. This resulted in improvement. However, in 1990, she was diagnosed by Shipman as having congestive heart failure. She also had palpitations. Although she was treated for congestive heart failure from 1990, the records do not indicate that this condition caused serious problems. Certainly, there is no sign of an acute episode. As she aged, Mrs Tierney developed problems with her hearing and sight.
After the death of her husband in 1992, Mrs Tierney became slightly depressed. She had occasional transient 'absences' or 'dreamy spells', the cause of which does not seem to have been established. She also suffered from arthritis, which limited her mobility. Despite these problems, she remained independent and would go into Hyde once a week until a few weeks before her death, when she fell heavily while out shopping. This left her bruised and sore and affected her confidence.
During the evening of Sunday, 9th
April 1995, Mrs Tierney telephoned Mrs Caldecott and told her that she was feeling sick and dizzy. She also mentioned that she had had chest pain earlier in the day. Mrs Caldecott told her mother to ring for the emergency doctor. Mrs Tierney said she would rather go to bed and see her own doctor, Shipman, early the next day.
The Day of the Death
Shipman's surgery visits book for 10th April 1995 records a visit request for Mrs Tierney and the note
'SHAKING
THINGS'
.
That day, Mrs Shenton visited her mother in the middle of the morning. Mrs Tierney was sitting in her chair with her feet up on a stool. She told her daughter that she had had a 'funny turn'. She said that it was as though she was looking down on herself or watching herself from outside. At about 11.30am, Mrs Shenton saw her mother's face go tense and she gripped either the chair arms or her chest (Mrs Shenton cannot remember which). Mrs Shenton suspected that her mother might be having a heart attack but, after a short while, Mrs Tierney went into the kitchen, took a tablet and sat down again. She seemed better and she assured her daughter that the doctor would be coming soon. The tablet was almost certainly glyceryl trinitrate. The medical records show that this drug had been prescribed for angina. Mrs Shenton stayed with her mother until about 12.45pm. On her way out, Mrs Shenton left the door open, ready for the doctor to visit. It was her mother's practice to leave the door ajar if she was expecting a visit from someone who did not have a key. Mrs Caldecott called and spoke to Mrs Shenton before she departed. She believes that she made this call at about 4pm. Shipman had not by that time arrived.
From about 1.30pm until 4.15pm, Mrs Caldecott tried to telephone her mother but the line appeared to be engaged. She thought the receiver must have been left off the cradle. At about 4.30pm, Mrs Caldecott decided to go to see her mother. With her husband, Mr Peter Caldecott, she arrived at the house at about 5.15pm. They noticed that the front door was open by at least six inches. They went in and found Mrs Tierney sitting in her chair in the living room. Mrs Caldecott realised that her mother had died. She felt her mother's face and it was cold. Mrs Tierney was sitting upright, with her head back, as though she were asleep, but her eyes were open and her hands were on her lap. She was wearing a dress and cardigan. Mrs Caldecott now thinks that her mother might have had a bruise on the back of her right hand, although she did not mention this to the police.
Mrs Caldecott went to pick up the telephone and noticed that the telephone was on its cradle. She thought this strange as, earlier, the line had been engaged. If Mrs Caldecott was correct in her recollection, this would suggest that someone had replaced the telephone on the receiver at some time between 4.15pm and 5.15pm. Mrs Mary Riley says that her mother would often take the telephone 'off the hook' if she wanted a sleep or to have some peace.
Mrs Caldecott telephoned Shipman's surgery and he arrived about 20 minutes later. She also telephoned her family, who congregated at Mrs Tierney's flat. When Shipman arrived, he told Mrs Caldecott that he had seen Mrs Tierney earlier that day at 'dinner time'. Mrs Caldecott said that her sister, Mrs Shenton, had been with her mother until 1.30pm, to which Shipman replied that he had been there at about 2pm. He said that Mrs Tierney had been suffering from heart trouble and he had advised her that she should go into hospital. She had refused. Shipman said that he had given Mrs Tierney an injection of frusemide, a diuretic, and had been going to call back later that day, to check on her condition and to see whether she had changed her mind about going into hospital. Shipman said that Mrs Tierney had died of heart failure. Mrs Riley said to Shipman that she was pleased that her mother had been able to die so peacefully at home. Shipman said he had attended a lot of deaths and most of them were not so peaceful. He said that, often, patients would be found on the floor or perhaps reaching for the telephone. He was quite cold and detached while speaking to the family and did not express any sympathy. After about 15 minutes, Shipman left.
It was Mrs Tierney's practice to put all her tablets out on the kitchen table when she was expecting the doctor to call. She had done so on this occasion and they were still there after she had died. The family is of the view that Mrs Tierney would have put them away soon after the doctor's departure, if she had been able to.
Mrs Tierney's handwritten medical records contain an entry for a home visit on the day of her death, incorrectly dated 10th April 1994:
'4/7 off colour dyspnoea on exercise
LVF ankle oedema
no obvious chest pains
Basal creps, cough
140/80 HS I II 3/6
JVP
liver palpable
CHF with ?LVF
IV lasix 80mg
Refuses admission to TGH
To review 18.00 hrs ? admit'
.
I interpret that entry to suggest that Mrs Tierney told Shipman that she had been off colour for four days and was breathless on taking exercise. He considered that she had left ventricular failure. He observed swelling of the ankles. He found she had no obvious chest pains. He heard basal crepitations and she had a bad cough. Blood pressure was 140/80, which is not unduly high, and heart sounds were normal, save that he heard a slight murmur, which would almost certainly be associated with the heart defect. Jugular venous pressure was raised and the liver palpable. His diagnosis was congestive heart failure with possible left ventricular failure. He administered 80mg Lasix, a diuretic. Mrs Tierney refused to be admitted to hospital. Shipman decided to review her at 6pm with a view to hospital admission. If genuine, these observations would justify the diagnosis of left ventricular failure.
There are two computerised entries for 10th
April 1994, the first of which reads as follows:
'Left ventricular failure
iv lasix refuses admission'
.
The second entry reads:
'O/E - dead
1730 lvf chf ihd'
.
I interpret this to refer to Shipman's second visit, when he found Mrs Tierney dead on examination at 5.30pm. The causes were left ventricular failure, congestive heart disease and ischaemic heart disease.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), saying that the immediate cause of death was left ventricular failure, which had commenced two to three days before the death. This condition was due to congestive heart failure, of five years' duration, and ischaemic heart disease, which he said had been present for nine years. He said that he had last seen Mrs Tierney alive on the day of her death.
As Mrs Tierney was buried, there are no cremation forms.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered that death was highly suspicious on the basis of the medical notes and records. He has commented that, although there is some evidence in the records that Mrs Tierney suffered from heart failure, there were no acute episodes until the day of death.
Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry, advised that before her death, Mrs Tierney's heart condition had been stable and there was no sign that she was suffering from gradually increasing congestive heart failure. Nor was there any correlation between Mrs Shenton's description of her mother's attack of chest pain and Shipman's note of the consultation which had supposedly taken place at 2pm. Dr Esmail thought it highly unlikely that Mrs Tierney could have suffered a catastrophic deterioration in her condition over such a short period of time.
In his generic evidence, Dr John Grenville has said that death from left ventricular failure is very distressing and that there are usually signs of lung secretions around the patient's mouth, produced during the process of dying. That a patient should be found sitting peacefully, as though asleep, is quite inconsistent with death from acute left ventricular failure.
Conclusion
In view of her medical history, Mrs Tierney must have been at risk of suffering a heart attack. She was not in good health on 10th
April and, during the morning, her daughter was concerned that she was having a heart attack. It seems more likely that she was suffering from angina, as the pain seemed to subside after she took a tablet. When Mrs Shenton left, Mrs Tierney was not in pain. Nor was she in pain when Shipman visited in the early afternoon. I think I can safely conclude that Mrs Tierney did not have a heart attack on the day of her death.
Shipman claimed that Mrs Tierney had been suffering from congestive heart failure for five years, although the medical records do not confirm this and certainly do not indicate that this condition, if present, was serious or increasing in severity. Having said that, congestive heart failure can lead to left ventricular failure, the condition from which Shipman said Mrs Tierney died. It seems to me that Mrs Tierney was at some risk of developing left ventricular failure.
Having recognised that risk, there are several features that point to this having been an unnatural death. First, the death was discovered quite shortly after a visit from Shipman. No one saw Mrs Tierney alive or spoke to her after Shipman's lunchtime visit. That is a highly suspicious factor. Second, that Mrs Tierney's tablets were still out on the kitchen table when her death was discovered tends to suggest that she died during or very shortly after Shipman's visit. Third, Mrs Tierney did not call any of her daughters after the visit. This was a very close family and it would have been natural for her to telephone one of them to report on the doctor's visit. That suggests that she might have been unable to do so.
The medical records suggest that Mrs Tierney had not been closely managed as a case of severe heart failure in the weeks before her death. It is highly unlikely that Mrs Tierney showed the classic signs of left ventricular failure as described in Shipman's note for the day of death. I can attach very little weight to that entry. It is well known that, when Shipman had just killed a patient, he would often make a false or exaggerated entry to provide a plausible explanation for the death and the cause that he gave.
The fact that the door was found ajar is not strongly probative. One might say that the fact that Shipman may have left the door open is as consistent with his having paid an ordinary visit as it is with his having murdered his patient before departing. It may be that if Mrs Tierney were alive when he left, she would have asked him to close the door, but one would have expected him to close the door in any event.
Finally, Mrs Tierney's appearance in death was inconsistent with a death due to left ventricular failure. Her appearance was, however, entirely typical of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection, almost certainly of diamorphine.
It is curious that Mrs Caldecott found the telephone line engaged for such a long time in the afternoon and found the receiver on the cradle when she arrived at the house. I do not think I should attach any significance to this. There may have been a fault on the line. Mrs Caldecott may have been mistaken in recalling the engaged tone. It is extremely unlikely that Shipman or someone else entered the house and replaced the receiver in the late afternoon.
Taking the above factors into account, it appears to me that the overwhelming likelihood is that Mrs Tierney was killed by a lethal injection administered by Shipman. I have considered whether there is a real possibility that she died a natural death. Although she was at risk of a death following a heart attack, there is no convincing evidence that she had a heart attack that day. I feel able to rule out the possibility that this was a sudden death from acute ventricular failure. Accordingly I have come to the conclusion that I can properly say that I am sure that Shipman was responsible for Mrs Tierney's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001