The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Lily Newby Taylor
Introduction
Mrs Lily Newby Taylor died at her home, 83 Brabyns Road, Hyde on Monday, 28th
July 1997 at the age of 86. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She, like the rest of her family, had held him in high esteem but, for some time prior to her death, she had been less satisfied with him, probably because he was giving her advice that she did not wish to take. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was old age.
In early 2000, following publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions for murder, Mrs Taylor's niece, Mrs Margaret Raynes, contacted the police and expressed concern about the circumstances of her aunt's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr George Douthwaite (a care worker) and Mrs Rita May Friday (a neighbour of Mrs Taylor).
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Taylor but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Professor Ken Taylor (Mrs Taylor's son), Mr Peter and Mr David Charlton (her nephews), Mrs Dorothy Charlton (Mr David Charlton's wife), Mrs Vera Porter (Mrs Charlton's mother), Mrs Raynes, Mrs Friday and Mr Douthwaite. Mrs Raynes, Mrs Friday and Mr Douthwaite gave oral evidence at a hearing on 15th
October 2001. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Taylor's general practitioner and hospital records, to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation, and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
Personal Background
Mrs Taylor lived with her husband, Mr Tom Taylor, in a semi-detached bungalow. Mr Taylor suffered from Alzheimer's disease and his mobility was greatly impaired; he was housebound. Mrs Taylor was his main carer with assistance from Social Services workers who attended several times a day. He also visited a day centre and had occasional periods of respite care. He had been in hospital between 14th
and 24th
July 1997 following frequent falls.
Mrs Taylor's computerised medical records reveal that she had had one or two gynaecological procedures and, in 1983, had undergone operative treatment for carcinoma of the colon. There was no spread of the disease and she made a good recovery. She had a cataract operation on her right eye in the 1980s and developed problems in her left eye subsequently, but no operation was thought necessary. In 1992 and 1993, she was not sleeping well and was weepy, and was prescribed suitable medication, including Prozac. In 1994, she was diagnosed by Shipman as having Parkinson's disease and was treated with appropriate medication for that condition. However, its effects were slight. In April 1996, she suffered an accident to her finger.
On 2nd
December 1996, there is an entry in the visits book which suggests that a visit was to be made to Mr Taylor. However, it appears that Shipman subsequently made entries in the computerised notes of both Mr and Mrs Taylor. It seems likely that Shipman only had Mr Taylor's written notes with him and used them to record entries relating to both patients. I say that because the manuscript entry in Mr Taylor's notes says:
'Day care/Carers
no real change in situation
Blood hb LBC BS LFT's
2st in 6/12
(
symbol for abdomen
)
soft bloods
constipation'
.
This entry then appears to be divided between the computerised notes of the two patients. For that day in Mrs Taylor's notes there appears:
'Abnormal weight loss - symptom...
?2st in 6/12 blood abdo soft constipation nil else'
.
I interpret that note to mean that Mrs Taylor was concerned about abnormal weight loss, which was thought to be as much as two stone over six months. He took blood samples for analysis. On examination, he found that her abdomen was soft, which is normal, and there was no problem apart from constipation.
In Mr Taylor's notes the entry reads:
'nothing new frail etc'
.
Certainly, Mrs Taylor was known to have been losing weight and the results of the blood tests were in her name, although one sample seems to have been erroneously labelled in her husband's name. Although the reports indicate that the results were higher than the normal limits, the view of the medical advisor to the Inquiry, Dr Aneez Esmail, is that they were within normal limits for someone of Mrs Taylor's age, so that no treatment was indicated. None was given.
The computerised notes suggest that Mrs Taylor saw Shipman in the surgery on 14th
December 1996, although there is no mention of any complaints or the results of any examination on that occasion. Nor is there any entry in the practice records for either Mr or Mrs Taylor on this date. A sleeping tablet, zopiclone, was prescribed for Mrs Taylor on 19th
December 1996. There are no further records of any consultations with her between that date and her death in July 1997.
However, Shipman would have seen Mrs Taylor in the course of visits to her husband at their home. He visited Mr Taylor on 24th
March 1997. Mr Taylor was in hospital between 14th
and 24th
July and, on Friday, 25th
July, a visit was requested as Mr Taylor had a cough. It seems that he was diagnosed as having a chest infection and the computerised note reveals an intention to visit again the following Monday. That intention is confirmed in the visits book.
Although Mrs Taylor was generally fit and active, the strain of caring for her husband had taken its toll. She was a small lady and somewhat frail. She had little appetite in the months before her death and had lost weight. She worried about her husband and on occasions would panic about his well-being and require reassurance from her family. For some time prior to her death, Shipman had been trying to persuade her that she and her husband should move from their bungalow into residential accommodation, but Mrs Taylor was determined to stay in her own home.
The Events of the Day before Death
On the evening of Sunday, 27th
July, the day before Mrs Taylor's death, Mrs Taylor's niece, Mrs Raynes, called to see the couple. Mr Taylor had been difficult to care for that day and his wife was tired. However, Mrs Taylor appeared in good spirits and, when Mrs Raynes left at about 10pm, Mrs Taylor still had friends with her. Professor Taylor, who lives in Australia, also spoke to his mother by telephone on 27th
July. According to him, she was in a terrible state, very depressed and talking of taking all of her sleeping tablets.
The Day of the Death
On Monday, 28th
July 1997, Shipman was due to revisit Mr Taylor. A neighbour, Mrs Rita Friday, had been in to see Mr and Mrs Taylor in the morning and found them to be their usual selves. There was no mention of a doctor's visit. After lunch, she saw Shipman arriving at the Taylors' bungalow and spoke to him. She knew him slightly. About 30 to 45 minutes later, she saw him leave. She believes that this was between 2.30pm and 2.45pm. He told her, when he left, that Mrs Taylor was not well and should go into hospital, but that he did not want to admit her there and then because of her husband's state of health. Shipman said that he had been trying to persuade the couple to go into care together, and intended to return on the following Monday to see if they had reached a decision.
There is no entry relating to that visit in Mrs Taylor's medical records. The visit was to Mr Taylor. The computerised note in Mr Taylor's records reads:
'chest ok chat re housing again to think on'
.
An audit trail has revealed that that note was made at 5.18pm on the same day, which is after the events that I am about to relate.
Some time after she had seen Shipman depart, Mrs Friday let herself into the Taylors' home and chatted to Mr Taylor for a few minutes. She did not see Mrs Taylor whom she assumed to be in the bathroom or the bedroom.
At between 3.15pm and 3.30pm, or possibly a little later, one of Mr Taylor's care workers, Mr Douthwaite, went to the bungalow. He let himself in as usual and went through the kitchen into the living room. Mr Taylor was sitting in his usual place, but Mrs Taylor was not to be seen. Mr Taylor was unable to tell Mr Douthwaite where Mrs Taylor was so he went to look for her. He found her lying on the bed fully clothed, apparently asleep. He tried to rouse her and then realised that she was dead. Mr Douthwaite went outside and beckoned to Mrs Friday who came to the bungalow and confirmed that Mrs Taylor had no pulse. Mr Douthwaite then telephoned Shipman's surgery and, shortly afterwards, Shipman arrived and announced that Mrs Taylor was dead.
Shipman then made arrangements by telephone for Mr Taylor to be admitted to a nursing home. He contacted Mrs Porter, mother of Mrs Dorothy Charlton who was married to the Taylors' nephew, Mr David Charlton, and was herself a friend of the Taylors. Mr and Mrs Porter drove to the Taylors' home. They telephoned Professor Taylor in Australia, organised the undertakers, and went to the nursing home that was eventually found for Mr Taylor.
Shipman's note of his second visit, made in Mrs Taylor's records, reads:
'O/E - dead...
1515 on bed seen by neighbour 1400 ok dc
(
death certification
)
old age parkinson'
.
In Mr Taylor's notes, he made this entry:
'Referral for further care
social services wife died suddenly'
.
An audit trail has established that that note was made immediately after the previous record relating to Shipman's first visit to the Taylors' home.
The Aftermath
Shipman completed the MCCD, in which he said that the cause of death was old age, with Parkinsonism as another significant condition contributing to the death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that the time of death was
'About 15.30 hrs'
, which was in fact about the time the body was found. He claimed to have attended Mrs Taylor for two to three years during her 'last illness'. What the last illness was supposed to be is not clear. In fact, she did not have a last illness. He recorded that he last saw her alive about three hours before her death (which on his timings would be at about 12.30pm)
'when visited
Mr
Taylor'
. He described the mode of death as
'Syncope'
taking
'minutes'
. In answer to the next question, he stated:
'Neighbour saw her 1 hr before death Mrs Taylor went to lie down 'felt tired'.
Found by carer 15.30 hrs'
.
Mrs Friday, who appears to have been the only neighbour on the scene, is adamant that she did not see Mrs Taylor an hour before her death or know that she had gone to lie down; nor did she tell Shipman either of those things.
Shipman also stated that Mr Taylor was present at the moment of his wife's death whereas, when her body was found, he was in the living room and she was in the bedroom. Given his physical and mental state, it seems highly unlikely that he could have been present in the bedroom at the time of her death or, if he had been, that he could have communicated that fact to anyone.
After Mrs Taylor's death, her son, Professor Taylor, came over from Australia. He had observed that his mother had been depressed before her death and he wanted to ask Shipman about the circumstances of her death. His recollection is that Shipman told him that he had had Mrs Taylor psychologically assessed in her home by a nurse practitioner and there was nothing wrong with her. There is no evidence in her notes that such an assessment took place; nor is there any relevant entry in the practice nurse's diary for the period 1st
January 1996 until the date of Mrs Taylor's death. It is possible that Shipman could have been referring to a home assessment report on Mr Taylor's needs, dated July 1996, in which Mrs Taylor is referred to as being
'relatively fit and well'
. Professor Taylor also recalls that Shipman explained to him that there should have been an inquest in Mrs Taylor's case but, in order to spare the family's feelings, he had completed the MCCD giving the cause of death as a heart attack. (In fact, he had not; he had given it as old age.) Shipman apparently told him that he had not seen Mrs Taylor in the two weeks before her death but, in order to avoid an inquest, had stated that he had seen her more recently in the forms that he had completed. Professor Taylor did not at that stage realise that Shipman had been at his parents' house on the morning of his mother's death and was able truthfully to say that he had last seen her then. Following that conversation, Professor Taylor suspected that his mother might have taken her own life and that Shipman, realising this, was attempting to spare the family the distress of this disclosure at an inquest.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker assessed the level of suspicion in this case to be high upon his consideration of the medical records and the cremation documentation.
Conclusion
The evidence in this case points strongly towards the conclusion that Shipman killed Mrs Taylor.
It must be recognised that a sudden death is always a possibility for someone of Mrs Taylor's age. However, Mrs Taylor was in remarkably good health for her age. She had not had occasion to consult Shipman for six months before her death. Even then, it was only for sleeping tablets. During recent months, she had coped with her severely disabled husband. The night before her death, she had entertained friends and, although she had seemed tired, she was in good spirits. On the morning of the day of her death, Mrs Friday found her to be her usual self. Shipman arrived at about lunchtime. Mrs Taylor was never seen alive again. Those facts alone strongly suggest that Shipman killed Mrs Taylor.
There are other factors that point to the same conclusion.
Shipman lied on Form B. He said that a neighbour had seen Mrs Taylor alive after he had left. The purpose of that lie is obvious. He also sought to suggest that the death had taken place at 3.30pm which was actually the approximate time at which the body was found. If Mrs Taylor died naturally in Shipman's absence, he could not possibly have known the time of her death. Yet, by suggesting a time, he was able to create the impression that her death took place a substantial time after his visit.
Shipman concealed from Professor Taylor that he had seen Mrs Taylor on the morning of her death. He appears to have passed the death off to Professor Taylor as being due to a heart attack. No doubt, had Professor Taylor learned that Shipman had seen his mother so short a time before the death, he would have wished to ask questions about his mother's state of health at that time.
Shipman made no attempt to explain the death in Mrs Taylor's medical records. Indeed, he made no record at all in Mr or Mrs Taylor's notes until after he had been recalled to the house following discovery of the death. When he did make an entry, it offered no explanation for the death. If asked about this death, by another doctor or the medical referee, he would have found it extremely difficult to explain. The cause of death, 'old age', was obviously inappropriate for a woman who had, that morning, been walking about and doing her chores. The reference to Parkinsonism as a contributory cause of death is grossly misleading as, even assuming the diagnosis was correct, the condition was so mild as to make no possible contribution to the death. There was no identifiable last illness and no available explanation for this death. The case should certainly have been referred to the coroner. Shipman seems to have conveyed the impression to Professor Taylor that he had done him a good turn by avoiding a referral. I am quite sure that Shipman must have been very anxious to avoid the possibility of referral.
Taking all these factors together, I am left in no doubt that Shipman killed Mrs Taylor.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001