The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Dorothy Tucker
Introduction
Mrs Dorothy Tucker died at her home, 102A Armadale Road, Dukinfield on Saturday, 7th
January 1984 at the age of 51. She had been a patient of Shipman for some time, probably since his arrival at the Donneybrook Surgery in 1977. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In February 2000, following Shipman's convictions at Preston Crown Court, members of Mrs Tucker's family expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Tucker's daughter, Mrs Susan Phillips, and Mrs Tucker's cousin, Mrs Mary Hannah Bennett. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Phillips and Mrs Bennett, Nursing Sister Dorothy Clegg (a district nurse), Mrs Lizzie Lynch (a neighbour) and Mrs Linda Baker (Mrs Bennett's daughter). Mrs Baker and Mrs Phillips gave oral evidence at a hearing on 30th
October 2001. Mrs Bennett was not well enough to attend. The Inquiry has also had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), Shipman's visits book for 1984, the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book and the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD).
Personal Background
Mrs Tucker was a divorcee and lived alone. She was very overweight and had suffered from leg ulcers for many years. During the last year or two of her life, she could walk only very short distances and had the use of a wheelchair. She could potter about her flat but was unable to do her own shopping. It is perhaps some measure of her immobility that Mrs Tucker kept a bed in her living room to save the trouble of walking to her bedroom. That was so, although the flat was all on the ground floor. Sister Clegg confirms that the leg ulcers were quite bad. Mrs Tucker's size impaired her mobility and her immobility impaired her circulation. Mrs Phillips recalls that the ulcers caused her mother some discomfort and sometimes severe pain.
Despite her physical problems, it appears that Mrs Tucker remained cheerful and enjoyed the company of her friends and family.
As Mrs Tucker's medical records are no longer available, it is not possible to make a reliable assessment of her state of health. It seems quite possible that she had heart problems, related to her obesity. However, she did not talk to her friends or family about her health. Mrs Baker had noticed that she was sometimes short of breath and thought this might be related to heart trouble. Mrs Phillips also noticed that her mother soon became breathless. She recollects one occasion, while she was staying with her mother following the birth of her own baby, when her mother became over-excited and breathless. Shipman was called and gave her mother an injection of morphine to calm her down. He said that the injection would also benefit her in case she should get pain in her legs from over-exertion. Mrs Phillips thinks, but is not sure, that Shipman gave her mother morphine injections every now and then to ease the pain caused by her ulcers. Sister Clegg does not remember that and thinks that if that were so, she would have been told about it. She says that in her experience of nursing patients with leg ulcers, opiates were not usually required.
Mrs Phillips telephoned her mother for a chat at about 11.30pm on the evening before she died. According to Mrs Phillips, Mrs Tucker seemed happy and well and said that she was going shopping the next day with Mrs Bennett. I do not think that can be right as Mrs Bennett suggests that at this time, it was her habit to telephone Mrs Tucker to see what shopping she wanted, implying that Mrs Tucker did not usually go on the expedition.
The Day of the Death
There is some conflict of evidence as to the events of 7th
January 1984. This is not surprising given the passage of time and the lack of contemporaneous documents, which often help to jog faded memories.
Mrs Lynch lived on the same road as Mrs Tucker and her sister lived in the flat above Mrs Tucker's. It was Mrs Lynch's routine to visit her sister before shopping at about 9am each morning. She would pass Mrs Tucker's flat. She says that Mrs Tucker was not the sort of person to stay in bed late and she would often see her up and about. On the morning of the day of her death, she did not see Mrs Tucker on her way to her sister's flat. When she returned from the shops at about noon, she noticed that Mrs Tucker's curtains were still closed and that her milk had not been taken in. She sensed that something was wrong because it was so unlike Mrs Tucker to stay in bed so late. She thinks it was she who raised the alarm which led to the discovery of Mrs Tucker's body, but she cannot remember to whom she spoke.
According to both Mrs Bennett's statements, she telephoned her cousin at about 2pm to ask what items of shopping she needed. Mrs Bennett and her husband always went shopping on a Saturday afternoon. She remembers that Mrs Tucker said that her doctor had been to see her because she had not been feeling well. In her Inquiry statement, Mrs Bennett said that Mrs Tucker told her that the doctor had been and had given her an injection. She said that she intended to have a little sleep. She did not say what the injection was for and Mrs Bennett did not ask. In her police statement, Mrs Bennett said that Mrs Tucker told her that the doctor had just been and had given her an injection and had said that she would feel better 'in a bit'. Mrs Bennett, who was going out to a social occasion in the evening, said that she would give Mrs Tucker her shopping over the weekend. She learned of the death at about 7pm.
Mrs Phillips has given two rather different accounts of the day. In her police statement, she said that from about 10.30am she tried to telephone her mother several times. There was no reply. She said that she assumed that her mother would be out shopping with Mrs Bennett. She did not learn of the death until the evening when a police officer came to her home.
In her Inquiry statement and in her oral evidence, Mrs Phillips did not mention any attempts to telephone her mother on the day of the death. She said that when she spoke to Mrs Bennett, soon after the death, Mrs Bennett told her that Shipman had visited Mrs Tucker at about 9am and had given her a dose of morphine. Mrs Phillips has, quite naturally, spoken to a number of people about the circumstances surrounding her mother's death and much of her account comprised what other people had told her. I did not find her evidence very reliable.
I found the evidence of Mrs Baker more reliable. She confirmed her understanding of the conversation which Mrs Tucker had had with her mother on the day of her death. She says that at the time of the death, when these matters were discussed, she was given the impression that Shipman had already visited Mrs Tucker and had left when Mrs Tucker spoke to Mrs Bennett.
Mrs Baker said that she believed that in the late afternoon or early evening, a neighbour of Mrs Tucker had become concerned because he or she had noticed that Mrs Tucker's curtains had not been closed and the lights were not on. The neighbour thought he or she could see Mrs Tucker sitting in the dark but was not sure. Whoever this neighbour was knew of Mrs Tucker's friendship with Mrs Bennett and went to her house. The Bennetts were out so the neighbour went to the house next door and obtained the telephone number of Mrs Baker. It appears that Mrs Tucker's neighbour must also have telephoned the police because, when Mrs Baker and her husband arrived at Mrs Tucker's flat, they found that the police were there and were about to force entry.
Mrs Baker went into the flat and found Mrs Tucker slumped in the corner of the settee. The lights were off and the fire was on. Her dog, which usually had the run of the flat, was shut in the kitchen. Mrs Tucker's tongue was protruding slightly from her mouth. Mrs Baker cannot recall what clothing Mrs Tucker was wearing but has some recollection that it was a dress with a pair of trousers underneath, which she sometimes wore to conceal her bandages. Mrs Baker thought that if Mrs Tucker had wanted to have a nap she would have lain on the bed which was in the room, rather than sitting on the settee.
Mrs Phillips arrived at the flat to identify her mother's body. She describes her mother as sitting fairly upright on the settee, with her head slightly tilted back and her hands by her side. She appeared to have fallen asleep sitting up. She said that the room was very warm indeed. Also she says that she was surprised to see her mother wearing nightclothes and a dressing gown, as usually she would be up and dressed by 9am, especially if she was expecting a visitor. It would only be if she had been troubled by pain in her legs that she would not have been dressed.
Mrs Bennett also came to the flat. She says that Mrs Tucker was slumped on the settee, looking as though she had dozed off. She looked peaceful. One of her legs was propped up on something. The fire was on and the room was very hot. Mrs Tucker was wearing a dress and cardigan and her legs were bandaged as usual. The telephone was kept on the sideboard and was not within reach from the settee.
Mrs Phillips remembers that Shipman came to the flat. The duty doctor diary shows that he was on out of hours duty that weekend. It appears that one weekend in seven, each of the Donneybrook doctors took turns to be on duty for a whole weekend, although it was usual for them to have calls transferred to the deputising service during the night. Shipman stayed for about 10 to 15 minutes. Mrs Phillips does not remember him carrying out any examination of her mother. He went straight into the room where her mother was sitting and said that it was probably for the best that she had died rather than to continue suffering.
Mrs Phillips said that her mother had a cigarette stuck to her lip, which had burnt down. The other witnesses did not mention this. Mrs Phillips also said that Shipman explained that her mother had died because of the problems she had with her legs and because of heart problems. This puzzled Mrs Phillips who was unaware of her mother having heart problems.
The Aftermath
Shipman completed the MCCD and counterfoil. The certificate has not survived, but the counterfoil is available. On it, he said that he had last seen Mrs Tucker alive on 6th
January 1984. His visit on that day is confirmed by an entry in his personal visits book. The date of death given on the counterfoil seems to have been altered and it is not now clear whether it reads 7th
, 8th
or 9th
January 1984. However, the date of Mrs Tucker's death on the death certificate is given as 7th
January and the witnesses agree that that is the true date of death.
Mr and Mrs Bennett were responsible for the registration of the death and the funeral arrangements.
Mrs Bennett states that she is sure that Shipman killed Mrs Tucker. I infer that her belief is that Shipman gave Mrs Tucker an injection which had a delayed action, so that she was able to speak on the telephone to Mrs Bennett, without Mrs Bennett perceiving that there was anything wrong with her friend. A short while later, Mrs Tucker had sat down for a rest and had died.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Henry McQuay has said that if a lethal dose of opiate were given intravenously, the patient would lapse into unconsciousness very quickly and would be unable to move about or hold a conversation. Death would follow within minutes of the injection. However, if the dose were to be administered intramuscularly, the person might be able to move about and hold a conversation for about 15 minutes or even up to 30 minutes afterwards.
I have sought the advice of the medical advisor to the Inquiry, Dr Aneez Esmail, in this case. He said that it can often be difficult to find a vein on an obese person. He also reminded me that the quantity of drug required to kill a heavy person would generally be greater than that required to kill a small person, although weight is only one of a number of variable factors. Poor respiratory health is another factor. He added that the time taken for an intramuscular dose to reach maximal effect would be longer in an obese person than in a slim one.
Conclusion
This is a difficult case to decide, mainly because of the lack of any medical records. I have the impression from the witnesses that Mrs Tucker was in poor health and I must assume that she was at some risk of suffering sudden death either from a heart attack or as the result of a pulmonary embolus following a deep vein thrombosis.
There is some doubt about when Shipman last visited Mrs Tucker. According to the MCCD counterfoil, he last saw her on 6th
January, the day before her death. However, Shipman often lied about the times and dates of his visits, so that cannot be relied on as accurate. He might well have visited her on 7th
January and not have entered it in any record. If he did visit her on 7th
but did not enter the visit in his visits book, one must ask whether there might be a sinister reason for that failure.
There is some evidence from Mrs Lynch that on the morning of 7th
January, the curtains remained closed and the milk stayed on the step with the result that she became concerned and raised the alarm. As it is reasonably clear that the alarm was raised in the late afternoon or early evening, I discount her evidence as probably mistaken.
Mrs Bennett has consistently said that Mrs Tucker told her that Shipman had already been to visit, and had given her an injection, when the two women spoke to discuss Mrs Tucker's shopping needs. She puts that conversation at about 2pm. The impression I gain is that Mrs Tucker was saying that Shipman had only just left. If Shipman had given her an intramuscular injection of a strong opiate, it is possible that she would have been able to speak to Mrs Bennett on the telephone and that Mrs Bennett would not have realised that there was anything seriously wrong with Mrs Tucker. This would fit with Mrs Tucker's declared intention to have a rest. It would also account for the fact that Mrs Tucker's dog was locked in the kitchen. The dog might well have been put there during a consultation with the doctor. Mrs Tucker might not have let him out before she felt drowsy and sat on the settee. Although Shipman usually gave diamorphine injections intravenously when killing his patients, it is a real possibility that he might have acted differently with Mrs Tucker. Due to her obesity it might have been very difficult for him to find a vein. He might either have chosen to give an intramuscular injection or the needle may have slipped out of the vein, causing the drug to enter Mrs Tucker's system subcutaneously. If either hypothesis were correct, it would mean that Shipman left his patient alive, knowing that she would soon die. From my experience of other cases, it appears that he did not usually do that. He preferred to wait in the house until he was sure that the patient was dead. With an intravenous injection that would only be a matter of minutes. With an intramuscular or subcutaneous injection he would have had to wait much longer. There would be a risk that the patient might be found or might summon help and might survive. The risk to Shipman would be very great. However, on this occasion, Shipman would have known that he would be on duty all weekend, so the risk of another doctor being summoned to deal with Mrs Tucker was minimal. There would be some risk that an ambulance might be called, but it may be that he decided to take that risk.
It must also be said that although Mrs Tucker was only 51, she was in many respects a typical Shipman victim. Shipman preyed mainly on women who lived alone and were in poor health. Mrs Tucker, although only 51, was in very poor physical condition.
Mrs Tucker's appearance in death is not unlike that of many of Shipman's victims. She seemed to have fallen asleep and did not appear to have been in pain. As Dr John Grenville has said in his generic evidence, patients who die after a heart attack usually have time to make a move towards seeking help. Although Mrs Tucker's mobility was poor, she was able to get out of her chair or settee. One would expect that if she had begun to suffer the pain that usually accompanies a coronary thrombosis, she would have made some attempt to reach the telephone. Similarly, a pulmonary embolus is usually painful and a similar reaction might be expected.
All the witnesses who attended Mrs Tucker's flat after the death noticed that the room was very hot. This suggests that Shipman might have turned up the fire. This is an odd feature of several Shipman killings. A high ambient temperature would accelerate the onset of rigor mortis. It would also have the effect of slowing the rate at which the body temperature falls after death. The result of leaving a body in a warm room would be to make it difficult or even impossible for a pathologist to make a reliable estimate of the time of death. There is a suspicion that Shipman would wish to achieve that end if he was concerned about his own role in the death. I do not attach much weight to this factor but it gives rise to slight suspicion.
After much hesitation, I have come to the conclusion that it is likely that Shipman killed Mrs Tucker. The evidence falls a long way short of that which would make me sure that he had killed her, but I think he probably did.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001