The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Margaret Townsend
Introduction
Mrs Margaret Townsend died at her home, 13 Busheyfield Close, Newton, Hyde on Friday, 11th
December 1987 at the age of 80. She had been a patient of Shipman since October 1987. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the stomach.
In February 2000, following publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions, Mrs Townsend's son-in-law, Mr David Alan Orson, contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances of her death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mr Orson.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Townsend but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mr Orson and has also taken statements from Mrs Margaret Orson (Mrs Townsend's daughter), Mr James Townsend (Mrs Townsend's son) and Miss Michelle Orson (Mrs Townsend's granddaughter). In the first paragraph of her witness statement to the Inquiry, Mrs Orson says that she gave a statement to the police, dated 31st
March 2000. The Inquiry was unable to find a statement made by Mrs Orson to the police. However, the mystery is resolved as Mrs Orson has now explained that she spoke to the police in March 2000 and contributed to Mr Orson's statement, which represented the evidence of the family. Mr and Mrs Orson have supplied supplemental statements to address various issues, which arose from perusal of Mrs Townsend's medical records. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Townsend's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documentation for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained two medical reports from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without a full oral hearing. Dr Grenville gave brief oral evidence on 7th
December 2001, at the request of counsel for the family.
Personal Background
Mrs Townsend was a widow and lived with her disabled son, Mr James Townsend, who is now 73. According to her family, Mrs Townsend was very active and enjoyed good health until 1987. Mr and Mrs Orson said, in their original Inquiry statements, that Mrs Townsend had not been to see her doctor since 1949. However, a different picture emerged from Mrs Townsend's general practitioner records, which were provided by West Pennine Health Authority.
The records show that, in February 1978, Mrs Townsend suffered upper abdominal pain that was found to be due to severe constipation. In April 1984, she complained of severe bronchitis and a hoarse voice. As she was a heavy smoker, it was thought that she might have lung cancer. However, a chest x-ray showed generalised changes of chronic bronchitis and emphysema but no definite evidence of cancer. Her hoarseness persisted and, in September 1984, she told her general practitioner that this had been present for three years. She was referred to Mr Kobbe, a consultant ear, nose and throat surgeon, who found that her vocal chords were oedematous and that there was a polyp on the left chord. An operative procedure for removal of the polyp and the oedematous epithelium of the vocal chords was performed in July 1985.
On 28th
June 1986, Mrs Townsend was visited at home by her general practitioner on account of a complaint of constipation, abdominal pain and back pain. A comprehensive examination was undertaken and no abnormality was found. The symptoms persisted and she was referred to Tameside General Hospital. Between 28th
June and 24th
July 1986, Mrs Townsend was seen on six occasions by at least four different doctors. No firm diagnosis was made but, according to Dr Grenville, the signs and symptoms recorded were suggestive of stomach cancer.
On 29th
July 1986, the consultant surgeon, Mr William Samarji, noted that Mrs Townsend had lost weight over the previous five weeks and was complaining of nausea and anorexia. Clinical examination revealed no abnormality but he suspected that she might have a carcinoma and arranged investigations. On 1st
August 1986, Mrs Townsend's general practitioner prescribed MST, a slow-release morphine tablet. I infer that Mrs Townsend must have been suffering from considerable pain. The investigations revealed no evidence of stomach cancer, although there was a small hiatus hernia with gastro-oesophageal reflux. Mrs Townsend complained of epigastric pain and difficulty in sleeping, even with sleeping tablets. In September 1986, Mrs Townsend was told that there was no evidence of cancer. Her morphine tablets were to be stopped gradually.
On 23rd
October 1986, Mrs Townsend was visited at home because she was reported to have collapsed. It appears that she thought that something had burst. On examination, there was no change in her situation. The view was expressed that she might be 'manipulating'. The doctor seems to have thought that Mrs Townsend had pretended to collapse, because her son had said that he was going to go out the following day.
On 30th
October and 1st
November 1986, Mrs Townsend was seen at home, complaining of severe abdominal pain. It was said that her daughter (presumably Mrs Orson) had been up with her all night. On examination, Mrs Townsend was said to be moaning and groaning, although the doctor who examined her regarded her epigastric tenderness as doubtful. She was admitted as an emergency to Tameside General Hospital and kept in until 4th
November. No cause for the pain was found. She was reviewed as an out-patient on 20th
November and a letter from Mr Samarji, the consultant on duty that day, said that the investigations had revealed no evidence of ulceration or carcinoma and the small hiatus hernia could not account for the pain of which she complained. The consultant plainly thought that there was nothing organically wrong with Mrs Townsend and suggested that, if she did not improve, a second opinion should be sought.
At this time, Mrs Townsend's general practitioner had prescribed temazepam to be taken at night and Largactil to be taken three times a day. Apart from requests for repeat prescriptions, there appears to have been no contact between Mrs Townsend and her doctor until July 1987, when the notes record that she was suffering from the same abdominal pain as before and was prescribed Gaviscon. It would appear that Mrs Orson attended the surgery on 19th
August 1987 and explained that her mother had continuing abdominal problems. On 22nd
September 1987, Mrs Townsend's doctor visited her following an urgent call from her neighbour. It was found that her weight was the same, her appetite was normal and she was slightly constipated. She was moaning but nothing abnormal was found and the doctor clearly thought the problem was non-organic. Shortly afterwards, the records show that Mrs Townsend was removed from his list.
The Period when Mrs Townsend was Registered with Shipman
Mrs Townsend saw Shipman for the first time on 20th
October 1987. He visited at her home and performed a new patient check. He recorded that Mrs Townsend had a poor appetite and that she had lost 1
1
/
2
stones in weight over the preceding nine months. She suffered from long-term constipation but had no problems with urination. He noted that she was on temazepam and paracetamol. On examination, he recorded that she looked pale and was very tender in the upper abdomen. She was said to feel full after a little food. He referred her to Mr M Cooper Wilson, a consultant surgeon at Tameside General Hospital. A letter from Mr Cooper Wilson to Shipman, dated 20th
October 1987, concerning Mrs Townsend reads as follows:
'Thank you for asking me to see this patient on a domiciliary visit with her backache and weight loss, the story is one of an advanced carcinoma of the pancreas for which I can do little, I have arranged for her admission for terminal care shortly'
.
According to the family, no such domiciliary visit ever took place and Shipman never discussed the issue of terminal care with them. Whether Mr Cooper Wilson visited or not, it is clear that Mrs Townsend was admitted to hospital on 21st
October and was discharged on 7th
November 1987.
Mr Cooper Wilson wrote to Shipman on 3rd
November 1987, saying that he had been investigating Mrs Townsend's abdominal pain. She was found to have an aortic aneurysm which could account for her severe pain. She was treated with morphine but this made her sick, so they had tried her on Tagamet. Her back pain improved on Tagamet so an ulcer was suspected but no active ulcer was found on gastroscopy. Mr Cooper Wilson then thought that the cause of the pain was either an inflamed duodenum or a cancer of the pancreas. An ultrasound scan of the pancreas was apparently not satisfactory. As I understand the letter, he was saying that the scan was technically not good and no definite opinion was possible. Mr Cooper Wilson said that he proposed to curtail further investigations. His prime objective was to obtain good symptomatic relief.
Mrs Townsend was discharged four days later with a recommendation that she should continue to take Tagamet indefinitely. The discharge summary, dated 13th
November, said:
'The lady's epigastric pain miraculously improved with Tagamet, although I could see no deep ulcer on gastroscopy. In view of her good response I decided not to take the investigations further. Ultrasound confirms an aortic aneurysm but of course if this is the cause of her pain she shouldn't get relief with Tagamet, it is a fact however, that certain types of pancreatic neoplasm can get relief from Tagamet, and I suppose this is still a possible diagnosis'
.
Dr Grenville confirms that there is no treatment for pancreatic cancer so it would be reasonable to undertake no further investigations if Mrs Townsend's symptoms could be relieved by Tagamet.
Shipman visited Mrs Townsend on 13th
November 1987, and noted that she was eating better and had been told that she had ulcers. It appears that he felt that she had been told this to protect her from the knowledge that the possible diagnosis was cancer.
The Days Leading up to Death
According to Mr Townsend, Shipman came to visit his mother on about three occasions after his first visit in October. He remembers that Shipman arrived unannounced on Monday, 7th
December 1987. There is no record of a visit on that day. Mr Townsend says that Shipman examined his mother and left Mr Townsend four tablets, which were to be given to his mother over the course of the next four days. He remembers having a conversation with Shipman about the tablets and he thinks that Shipman said they were for cancer. He describes the conversation as having been confusing, but says that he was convinced by Shipman that Mrs Townsend's condition was bad and that she should be given the tablets. Mr Townsend did as he was told. He says that, once she started taking these tablets, his mother seemed a lot sleepier and seemed to have less energy. In the days leading up to her death, she spent the majority of her time in bed.
Mr and Mrs Orson's recollection of this incident seems to be based entirely on what they have been told by Mr Townsend. Mr Orson told the police that, for the four days after she had been given the tablets, Mrs Townsend did not leave her bed. Both Mr and Mrs Orson confirm that in their witness statements. However, in their supplemental witness statements, Mr and Mrs Orson say that what they meant was that, after taking these tablets, Mrs Townsend spent a lot more time in bed.
As explained below, it seems probable that a visit did take place, if not on 7th
December 1987, then on a day some time around that date. It also seems likely that the tablets that were given were opiate painkillers, known as DF118. DF118 is the trade name for dihydrocodeine.
Although Mr and Mrs Orson were under the impression that Mrs Townsend did not leave her bed after the visit of 7th
December 1987, both Mr Townsend and Miss Orson confirm that Miss Orson visited her grandmother and her uncle at about lunchtime that day, and that they all sat together and had lunch. According to Miss Orson:
'I remember my grandmother seemed fine in herself but I noticed she was not as chatty in the last few weeks as she had previously been. She wasn't playing cards like she always used to and she looked tired. I left the house just before 2.00 pm to go back to work'.
The evidence of Mr Townsend is that his niece remained at the house for about 50 minutes.
Both Mr Townsend and Miss Orson deny that Shipman visited Mrs Townsend on 10th
December 1987. There is an entry in the visits book which suggests that he did so and that Mrs Townsend was the fifth person whom he intended to visit that day. The entry in the handwritten general practitioner notes for that day reads as follows:
'10/12/87 V
(
visit
)
DF118
(
dihydrocodeine
)
not strong enough
MST 10g T BD'
.
Although it is disputed that this visit ever took place, the reference to dihydrocodeine would fit in with Mr Townsend's recollection that, a few days earlier, he had been given some pills for his mother to take. It is possible that Mrs Townsend said that these tablets were not strong enough. The fact that a visit took place is strongly supported by an attendance note made by the duty doctor later that evening, to which I shall refer below.
Members of the family recall that they visited Mrs Townsend at about 6.30pm on 10th
December. Mr and Mrs Orson say that Mrs Townsend was tired but appeared in quite good health and was quite jovial. They had no serious concerns about her state of health at that time. Mrs Orson says that she helped her mother to have a bath and that they then all sat down together and had a snack. It appears that Miss Orson was there and helped her mother to bathe Mrs Townsend. Miss Orson remembers that her grandmother seemed tired and not quite herself, but she does not remember her saying that she felt unwell. That Mrs Townsend required assistance with bathing and appeared to be spending much of her time in bed would suggest that she was quite frail by this stage. However, in her second supplementary statement, Mrs Orson denies that her mother was frail or unwell.
Mr Townsend remembers that the guests left at about 9pm and that his mother then went to bed. Some time after that, his mother complained of stomach pains. At about 11.30pm, he telephoned for a doctor. It appears that the deputising doctor attended. Mr Townsend believes that the doctor may have had difficulty in understanding his speech because of his speech impairment and he thought the doctor's English was poor. He left the doctor alone to examine Mrs Townsend. The doctor did not appear to prescribe anything but provided Mr Townsend with a letter in a sealed envelope and told him to give it to Shipman. The doctor then left. After the doctor left, his mother seemed better and then went back to sleep. In fact, there is a prescription contained within the medical notes and records made out by the duty doctor. It may be that this prescription was sent to Shipman in the relevant envelope, although the reason why the duty doctor should act in this way is unclear.
Until the duty doctor's note was brought to the attention of Mr and Mrs Orson, Mr Townsend had apparently made neither aware of that visit. This is most surprising, as the visit took place late at night on the eve of Mrs Townsend's death. There is no sign of any problem with English in the duty doctor's attendance note, which is clear and detailed and contains no problems with spelling. It says:
'History and Findings
C/O diarrhoea 4 to 5 times tonight
abdo Pain + (seen by
her Dr @ noon for Pain)
No vomiting
Pulse
76/min
B.P.
120/70
Clinical Findings
(H/O ?? Gastric ulcer ? aneurysm)
unsteady on her feet
O/e Tongue dry. Pupils
. Not dyslopia
No neck rigidity. Speech
No oedema of ankle.
RS
Air Entry fair
Abdo soft. Pain and tender across the upper
quadrant
Diagnosis
? gastro-enteritis
Treatment MST
(
illegible
)
from tonight
on
Morphine Sulp
cimetidine Temazepam
Advice
Rehydration Sachet 1 x 4 hs
(
hours
)
Cap Imodium
(
illegible
)
5xtds'
Patient's own Doctor
SHIPMEN
(
sic
)
Please revisit
Friday
DUTY DOCTOR
To phone for Dr if no
better'
.
The note suggests that Mrs Townsend had had diarrhoea four or five times that night. She had abdominal pain and had seen her own doctor at noon on account of pain. She was not vomiting. There was a history of a possible gastric ulcer and a possible aneurysm. Mrs Townsend was unsteady on her feet. Her tongue was dry but her pupils were reacting normally. There was no neck rigidity. Speech was normal. There was no oedema of the ankles. Air entry on the right side was fair. The abdomen was soft. There was pain and tenderness across the upper quadrant. Mrs Townsend's pulse was 76 beats per minute and her blood pressure was 120/70. The doctor made a tentative diagnosis of gastro-enteritis. The doctor noted that Mrs Townsend was on morphine sulphate (as had been prescribed by Shipman earlier in the day). He also noted that she was on cimetidine and temazepam. He advised that she should have a rehydration sachet every four hours, and Imodium three times a day. A request was made that she be revisited on Friday, which was the following day. She was advised to telephone for the doctor if she was no better.
This duty doctor's note clearly confirms that Shipman had visited Mrs Townsend on 10th
December on account of her complaint of pain. It seems that Mr Townsend has forgotten about this visit. The note also casts some doubt on the accuracy of the family's recollection that Mrs Townsend was sitting up chatting and eating a snack on the evening of 10th
December. She seems to have called the doctor because she had had diarrhoea four or five times that night.
The Day of the Death
According to Mr Townsend, at about 11am on 11th
December 1987, Shipman arrived unexpectedly at the house. He let himself in and went upstairs to Mrs Townsend's bedroom, where her son was sitting with her. It is possible that Shipman came because he had learned of the duty doctor's visit the night before. It is also possible that Mr Townsend had telephoned for Shipman that morning but has forgotten. In any event, it is clear that Shipman came.
Mr Townsend says that Shipman made it clear that he wanted him to leave. This would be understandable for reasons of privacy and, of course, Mr Townsend had left the room when his mother was examined the previous evening by the duty doctor. Mr Townsend went outside and had a cigarette at the garden gate.
Mr Townsend remembers that he had been outside for no more than ten minutes when Shipman came down and shouted to him that his mother had only moments left. He says that, as he walked into his mother's bedroom, she seemed to look up at him and then died. Shipman appeared to check for a pulse and confirmed that she was dead. Understandably, Mr Townsend was completely shocked and upset. A neighbour came to the house and together they sat with Shipman for a while, as Shipman smoked his pipe. Shipman was polite and his manner appropriate. Mr Townsend gave Shipman the letter from the duty doctor. The neighbour telephoned Mr and Mrs Orson, who arrived at about 12.20pm, just as Shipman was leaving. According to Mr and Mrs Orson, Shipman stopped to speak to them and told them that he was sorry and that he had given Mrs Townsend an injection to make her comfortable. Except for a slight discrepancy over the timing, Mr Orson gave the same account in his police statement.
Shipman's handwritten note for the day of Mrs Townsend's death reads as follows:
'11/12/87 V BP 80/? Pulse 60/m very weak
abdo soft -
(
an illegible word
)
1300 hours patient died
D.C.
carcinomatosis
Ca stomach
HFS'
.
This suggests that Mrs Townsend's blood pressure was very low and that her pulse was weak. There is no reference to an injection. The note confirms that Mrs Townsend died in Shipman's presence.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death. Although the certificate has not survived, its counterfoil is available and shows that Shipman certified the cause of death as carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the stomach. He stated that he had last seen Mrs Townsend alive on the day of her death, that he had seen the body after death and that a post-mortem examination would not be necessary.
As Mrs Townsend was buried, there are no cremation documents.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville thinks that it is likely that, in the days leading up to the death, Shipman made more visits than he recorded in the notes. He thinks it is likely that Shipman prescribed dihydrocodeine (a strong opiate) and morphine sulphate earlier than is suggested in the notes. He notes that Shipman's records do not identify severe pain and the family does not recall that Mrs Townsend was in severe pain before her death. If Mrs Townsend were given strong opiates when she did not need them, this would explain why she rapidly became weak and tired. Dr Grenville thinks that the prescription of strong opiates was probably not appropriate.
There is, however, some evidence that Mrs Townsend was in pain. The duty doctor recorded that she had been seen by Shipman at noon that day because of pain. If, as Mr Orson first suggested to the police, Shipman was called out by the family that morning, the most likely reason was that Mrs Townsend was saying again that she was in pain. Dr Grenville says that, if Shipman believed that he was dealing with a malignancy, he could quite properly give an injection of strong opiate to relieve pain. This would accord with Mr Orson's recollection that Shipman said that he had given Mrs Townsend an injection to make her more comfortable. However, if Shipman gave such an injection for proper therapeutic reasons, it is difficult to understand why he did not record the treatment in the medical notes.
In his second report, Dr Grenville considered the mode of Mrs Townsend's death. He said that, if Mrs Townsend's pulse and blood pressure were as recorded by Shipman, he would have expected her to have appeared obviously very ill. Mr Townsend would have noticed this. Shipman's recorded clinical findings would be consistent with any of the common causes of sudden death, including heart attack, stroke, pulmonary embolus or ruptured aortic aneurysm. None of those causes can be positively excluded as a cause of Mrs Townsend's death (especially the ruptured aortic aneurysm) but Dr Grenville does not think that any of them was the likely cause. Any such sudden death would have been far more likely to occur at some time when Shipman was not present than during the short span of time when he was alone with her.
Dr Grenville says that Shipman was not justified in certifying the cause of Mrs Townsend's death as carcinomatosis due to cancer of the stomach. There was no evidence that Mrs Townsend had widespread metastatic cancer, and there was good evidence that she did not in fact have cancer of the stomach. If Shipman believed the tentative diagnosis previously made that Mrs Townsend was suffering from pancreatic cancer, he could have certified her death as being due to this only, but good practice would have required him to discuss this with the coroner. Given that the diagnosis was, at its very highest, tentative, Dr Grenville says that most coroners would have ordered a post-mortem examination.
In conclusion, Dr Grenville said:
'I believe that Shipman may have treated Mrs Townsend over-zealously for what was only a presumptive diagnosis, and may in fact have brought about her death as a result of this. Alternatively, he may have set out to murder her using the diagnosis of possible pancreatic cancer as a smoke-screen'
.
Conclusion
It is not possible to reach a clear conclusion about Mrs Townsend's state of health in the weeks and days leading up to her death. It is possible that she had cancer of the pancreas but this was never demonstrated. As most other common causes of pain had been excluded and as pancreatic cancer cannot be cured, it was reasonable to treat Mrs Townsend symptomatically.
Whatever the cause of Mrs Townsend's problems, it seems likely that she did complain of pain in the days leading up to her death. It also seems likely that Shipman prescribed dihydrocodeine on or about 7th
December, that he saw her on 10th
December and prescribed morphine tablets, and that the duty doctor was called out that evening. What cannot be known is the extent to which those complaints were of pathological pain or, if so, what was their cause. It does seem likely that there was a psychosomatic element in Mrs Townsend's pain. This is suggested by the 'miraculous' improvement on Tagamet. Her previous doctor thought her pain was partly or wholly psychosomatic. It is, therefore, hard to gauge the extent of the organic component of her pain.
It is not only the cause and level of Mrs Townsend's pain that is uncertain. It is also unclear to what extent she was disabled in the days before she died. The picture painted by the family is that she was effectively confined to bed for four days before she died. They ascribe this to the tablets that Shipman had given, and Dr Grenville confirms that the prescription of strong opiates may explain why Mrs Townsend apparently became rapidly weak and tired. Alternatively, of course, it could be that Mrs Townsend had been rendered weak by illness and pain and that her drowsy condition was due to the effect of the opiates which she genuinely needed.
What is plain is that Shipman visited Mrs Townsend on the day of her death and that she died in his presence. His medical note suggests that her blood pressure was very low and that she was very weak when he found her. This represents a dramatic change from her condition when seen by the duty doctor the previous evening. Such a rapid change arouses some suspicion. The medical notes which Shipman made at or shortly after a death cannot be accepted as genuine unless confirmed by independent evidence. I have seen many cases where he has fabricated an entry to provide a feasible explanation for a death which he has himself caused. I must approach that entry with extreme caution.
The family says that Shipman admitted giving Mrs Townsend an injection to make her more comfortable. In none of their witness statements has any member of the family suggested that it struck them as strange that there was a need to make Mrs Townsend comfortable. The inference must be that they believed that she was or had been in discomfort, and, even if they had not been with her that morning, this is something that they would have had the opportunity to confirm with Mr Townsend. It was not until Shipman's
modus operandi
was well known that Mr Orson expressed his concerns to the police. I cannot be sure that the Orsons' recollection about what Shipman said at the time is accurate. Their recollection in other respects has been found to be unreliable.
Although there are many uncertainties in this case, the fact remains that Mrs Townsend died in Shipman's presence. Shipman certified the death as being due to cancer of the stomach when this diagnosis had been excluded. The diagnosis of pancreatic cancer had never been confirmed. There is a possibility that Mrs Townsend had pancreatic cancer, but the full and careful note made by the duty doctor does not convey the impression of a woman in the terminal stages of a cancer. Nor for that matter does it appear that the duty doctor thought that Mrs Townsend was close to death from any other cause. As Dr Grenville said, it is possible that Mrs Townsend died as the result of any one of a number of natural causes but, if she did, it was a remarkable coincidence that she should have done so in Shipman's presence.
Taking all the evidence into account, I have come to the conclusion that Shipman probably killed Mrs Townsend. I cannot be sure of this conclusion, as there are a number of uncertainties in the evidence, but I do think it is far more likely that he killed her than that she died of carcinomatosis or any other natural cause.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001