The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Walter Tingle
Introduction
Mr Walter Tingle died at his home, 4 Walker Close, Hyde on Sunday, 6th
November 1988 at the age of 85. He was a widower and lived alone in sheltered accommodation. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was coronary thrombosis due to systemic arteriosclerosis.
In January 2001, the Greater Manchester Police decided to investigate the death because Professor Richard Baker considered that the information within the cremation certificate raised suspicions about Shipman's involvement. The police took statements from Mr Tingle's son, Mr Norman Tingle, and from the warden at Walker Close, Mrs Audrey Grace Roscoe. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Miss Janet Ann Tingle, Mr Tingle's granddaughter, and further statements from Mr Norman Tingle and Mrs Roscoe. The Inquiry has had access to Mr Tingle's general practitioner records and to the visits book for 1988, the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Norman Tingle lived in Scotland and did not see his father frequently. However, they maintained regular telephone contact. Mr Norman Tingle says that his father was a very active man. Until he was quite old, he enjoyed dancing and bowls. He was a regular churchgoer. In his early eighties he developed a problem with his circulation causing bouts of dizziness, which resulted in at least two unpleasant falls. These caused a loss of confidence. However, Mr Tingle still enjoyed dancing, with a woman friend who was his regular partner. Until shortly before his death, he attended a day centre where he had his midday meal.
Mr Tingle's medical notes suggest that he began to suffer episodic syncopal attacks in the early 1980s. Although it is not clear, it seems that he had a stroke in about 1986, after which he recovered his mobility. In 1987, Shipman referred him to Tameside General Hospital where he was said to have cervical spondylosis with vertebro-basilar ischaemia and spinal cord involvement, for which he was prescribed junior aspirin. His blood pressure was found to be high. An electrocardiogram (ECG) taken in March 1987 showed no arrhythmia and there is no suggestion elsewhere in the medical records that Mr Tingle had heart problems. In February 1988, Shipman wrote of Mr Tingle's increasing frailty and requested that he be considered for a change in his sheltered accommodation.
The daily diary kept by Mrs Roscoe is consistent with this picture. Mrs Roscoe, who thought that Mr Tingle was a 'lovely old man', thinks that he became depressed before his death because of the breakdown of the relationship he enjoyed with his dancing partner. Mrs Roscoe believes that he became suicidal and there is reference to suicidal ideation in the general practitioner records for 13th
July 1988. Mr Norman Tingle and his daughter do not accept that Mr Tingle had such thoughts. Miss Tingle made the point that such ideas would conflict with Mr Tingle's religious beliefs.
Mrs Roscoe's diary reveals that, in the months before he died, Mr Tingle was prone to falls and suffered from occasional incontinence. He was unhappy about his physical condition.
The Period Leading up to Death
On 6th
September 1988, Mrs Roscoe found Mr Tingle to be unwell and sent for Shipman. Shipman visited and said he would arrange for a geriatrician to assess him for a period of in-patient treatment.
On 16th
September 1988, Dr A P Sil, an associate specialist in medicine for the elderly, wrote to Shipman saying that he had visited Mr Tingle and that he would list him for a period of in-patient treatment. He mentioned that Mr Tingle had had a stroke two years earlier and had recently lost the use of his legs. He had become very slow in his movements. Dr Sil thought that Mr Tingle was suffering from cerebrovascular disease and possibly early Parkinson's disease.
There is no further record of Mr Tingle within the documentation held by the Inquiry until 20th
October 1988, when the following entry appears in Mrs Roscoe's diary:
'Mr Tingle had mobiles out
6-45 - said his legs had gone he got
back into bed mobiles told him to
I got him up gave him some breakfast &
a drink got him organized for day care'
.
I understand that the
'mobiles'
are the mobile wardens who provided supervision outside the working hours of the regular warden.
Mrs Roscoe wrote in her diary for 25th
October that Mr Tingle was
'not good'
. On 1st
November, she wrote that he was
'very fed up with himself'
and, on 2nd
November 1988, she noted that he had expressed a desire to die. On 4th
November, he was again said to be
'not very good'
. On 5th
November 1988, Mr Tingle went to the day care centre as usual.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Roscoe's diary for Sunday, 6th
November 1988 reads as follows:
'off duty . Mr Tingle didn't go to day care
the young man who takes Mr Tingle to day care
sent for Emergency Dr, I notices
(
sic
)
Mr Tingle's door
open. I went to have a look at him just as
Dr Shipman rolled up in his car. Mr Tingle did
look poorly. Anyway Dr Shipman asked me to
send for the ambulance so I came across here to do it
anyway. Dr Shipman gave him an injection.
I held him & then held his hand & put my
arm around him. Anyway
I went
Dr Shipman
told me to go and cancel the ambulance it
was too late he had passed away 10-55AM'
.
That entry contains the essence of the accounts given by Mrs Roscoe to the police and to the Inquiry. She said that that morning, she was at her flat when the driver from the day care centre came to see her and said that Mr Tingle did not want to go to the centre. The driver had called the doctor out. Although she was not on duty, Mrs Roscoe went to Mr Tingle's flat. He did not look well and was depressed. He said he did not feel well enough to go to the day centre. Mrs Roscoe tried to calm and reassure him. She saw that he looked pale or grey but she says he was not sweating.
Mrs Roscoe told the police that Shipman arrived in the late morning or at about lunchtime. She did not initially go into the bungalow with Shipman but saw him going out to his car as she arrived. She went into the bungalow and found Mr Tingle sitting on his bed. She told the police that, while Shipman was at his car, Mr Tingle told her that he had
'had enough'
. She told the Inquiry that Mr Tingle had said that directly to Shipman.
Mrs Roscoe told the police that, when Shipman returned to the bungalow, he went over to Mr Tingle and told Mrs Roscoe to hold onto Mr Tingle, who, he said,
'won't be long now'
. Mrs Roscoe thought Shipman was going to give Mr Tingle a vitamin injection and although she did not actually see him give the injection, she believes that he did so. About two minutes later, Mr Tingle's head slumped forwards onto her chest and he died. Mrs Roscoe was very shocked.
Mrs Roscoe told the Inquiry that Shipman at some point asked Mrs Roscoe to telephone for an ambulance, although he did not say why. Mrs Roscoe was surprised by this request, but did not ask any questions. She said that she made the telephone call from her flat and was gone for about two minutes. She told the Inquiry that, either before she went to make the telephone call for the ambulance or after she got back, Shipman gave an injection to Mr Tingle. She cannot now recall whether Shipman announced what he was doing, nor can she recall whether she actually saw Shipman administer the injection. She did, of course, tell the police that she could not remember seeing the injection being given. She thinks that she saw the syringe and feels sure that an injection was administered.
Mrs Roscoe told the Inquiry that, after she returned to Mr Tingle's flat, she sat down on the bed next to Mr Tingle. Shipman asked her to hold onto him and said,
'He'll be all right in a few minutes'
. She put her arms around Mr Tingle and gave him a big hug. A few minutes later Mr Tingle died. It appeared that he just went to sleep. Shipman remained in the room, and was present at the moment of death. He later instructed Mrs Roscoe to cancel the ambulance.
Shipman made the following handwritten entry in the medical records:
'10.55 Died
CT
DC
self + warden present
CT
Systemic arteriosclerosis'
.
From this entry I infer that he was saying that Mr Tingle had died of a coronary thrombosis at 10.55am. He and the warden had been present. The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') would say that the death was due to coronary thrombosis and systemic arteriosclerosis. I note that there is no record of the signs or symptoms on which Shipman based his diagnosis and no reference to the administration of any injection.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been recovered. Shipman said that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis due to systemic atherosclerosis. He confirmed that he had last seen Mr Tingle alive on the day of his death.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He initially stated that the death occurred at 10.55am on 7th
November 1988, although the date was subsequently changed (by the doctor who completed Form C, Dr Bennett) to 6th November. Shipman said that he had attended Mr Tingle during his last illness for 20 minutes and had last seen him alive immediately before his death. He said that he had seen the body immediately after death and made a complete external examination of it. The cause of death was given as on the MCCD counterfoil. The mode of death was said to be collapse lasting only minutes. Shipman stated that his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and on statements made by Mrs Roscoe, the warden. Shipman said that both he and Mrs Roscoe were present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Following his consideration of the cremation certificate, Professor Richard Baker concluded that the death of Mr Tingle was highly suspicious.
Conclusion
The circumstances of Mr Tingle's death give rise to an irresistible inference that Shipman must have killed him. Mrs Roscoe's account, the essentials of which were recorded contemporaneously, shows that Mr Tingle died very shortly after Shipman had given him an injection. Mrs Roscoe does not say that Mr Tingle was in great pain, such as might indicate that he was having a heart attack or was in need of a pain-relieving injection. Shipman did not record the administration of any drug. These circumstances alone give rise to grave suspicion.
It seems to me unlikely that Mr Tingle had a heart attack on the day of his death. He must have been at some risk of such an event, if only on account of his age and gender, but there is nothing in the medical records to suggest that he was at a significantly increased risk over and above that which was inherent in his age and gender. More to the point, such description as we have of Mr Tingle that morning is not suggestive of a heart attack. He told the driver that he did not feel well enough to go to the day centre. The driver called the doctor. I do not have the impression that the driver thought Mr Tingle was obviously in a serious condition. When Mrs Roscoe saw him, she thought he looked pale or grey and unwell but did not think he was sweating. She does not suggest that he appeared to be in pain. Shipman's entry in the medical records is woefully inadequate on any view, but he proffers no description of signs or symptoms to substantiate his apparent diagnosis of coronary thrombosis.
In support of the claimed diagnosis of heart attack, I note that Shipman instructed Mrs Roscoe to call an ambulance. That would be an appropriate course. However, it is entirely possible that Shipman did that so as to appear to be doing the right thing. He also told her to cancel it as soon as Mr Tingle had died. Second, if Mr Tingle were suffering a heart attack and were in severe pain, it would be appropriate to administer a small dose of opiate. Of course, details of that administration should have been recorded in the medical notes and were not. We have no idea how much of which drug Shipman gave, but the fact that no record was made and that Mr Tingle died within about two minutes makes it highly likely that the dose was lethal and was designed to kill rather than to relieve pain. There is no evidence that Mr Tingle was suffering such pain as would have warranted a pain-relieving injection.
Shipman knew that Mr Tingle was depressed by his physical condition. Even if he did not hear Mr Tingle's statement to that effect on the day of his death, he would have been aware from the entry for 13th
July 1988 that he had expressed a wish to die. I think it quite likely that Mr Tingle told Shipman that day that he had had enough and wanted to die. I think it likely that Shipman was prepared to ensure that he did.
In all the circumstances, the overwhelming probability is that Mr Tingle was unlawfully killed by Shipman. That the killing took place in the presence of a third party does not deter me from drawing the necessary inferences. I have come across other cases in which Shipman has killed in the presence of a third party, sometimes even an experienced carer. The evidence in this case is such that I feel able to say that I am sure that this was an unlawful killing.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001