The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Alice Thomas
Introduction
Mrs Alice Thomas died at her home, 26 Sidley Place, Hyde on Thursday, 16th
April 1987 at the age of 83. She had been a patient of Shipman, probably for about nine years. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
In 2001, the police investigated the death because Professor Richard Baker informed them that he regarded the death as highly suspicious on the basis of the information contained within the cremation forms. They took statements from Mrs Thomas' son, Mr Glynn Thomas, and his daughter, Mrs Krista Randall. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has contacted Mr Thomas and Mrs Randall but neither wished to assist the Inquiry. Mrs Hilda Williams, Mrs Thomas' younger sister, was of the same mind.
The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book. The Inquiry has also had access to the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), the cremation forms and the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'). Mrs Thomas' medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Thomas was a widow and lived alone in a ground floor flat at Sidley Place. According to Mr Thomas, his mother was not in good health. She had suffered a number of strokes, the first about 20 years before she died. At the time of her death, Mrs Thomas was recovering from a fractured femur.
Mr Thomas visited his mother on Wednesday, 15th
April 1987. In his statement to the police he does not comment on her state of health, although he says that she told him that if the weather was nice the next day, she intended to have a walk with her Zimmer frame on the green outside her home. This would have been her first exercise for some time. Mrs Thomas told her son that she was expecting a visit from Shipman the following day for 'one of her check-ups'. According to Dr Napier, who also practised from the Donneybrook Surgery, he and other doctors used to visit their elderly patients on a monthly basis in their own homes.
The Day of the Death
On Thursday, 16th
April 1987, Mr Thomas was having lunch in a public house when his aunt, Mrs Hilda Williams, arrived to tell him that Mrs Thomas had died. She said that Shipman had been with her when she died and that he had drawn the curtains before he left. Mr Thomas later learned that she had been informed of the death by Mrs Alice Ridgeway, Mr Thomas' mother-in-law, who was a neighbour of Mrs Thomas. Mr Thomas went to Mrs Ridgeway's house where he met his daughter, Mrs Randall. They both remember seeing a 'death certificate' certifying the cause of death to be cerebrovascular accident. Mrs Randall remembers that there was also a note saying that Shipman had been present at the death and that there was no need to contact anyone other than the undertakers. This certificate was probably the MCCD.
Mr Thomas and Mrs Randall then went to Mrs Thomas' home. Mr Thomas remembers finding his mother sitting in her usual chair in the living room. In his statement to the police, he described her appearance as follows:
'Her face was extremely distorted and her body was twisted in the chair. On one side of her face I saw that there were raised blood vessels. I am totally satisfied that my mum had suffered a stroke and as far as I am concerned there was evidence in her face to show this'.
Mrs Randall also recalls that her grandmother was sitting in her usual chair, dressed in her day clothes. She does not mention that her body was twisted in her chair, but says that she was sat with her head leaning to the right. Her recollection of Mrs Thomas' face was that the right side was 'discoloured and drooping' but that the left side appeared normal. Mrs Randall remembers thinking at the time that, as Shipman had been present at the time that her grandmother had died, it was strange that he had not contacted an ambulance or any member of the family to tell them that she was ill.
Although there is good evidence to suggest that Mrs Thomas was expecting a visit from Shipman, her name does not appear in his visits book for 16th
April 1987. There is only one visit recorded in the book for that day.
Certification
The MCCD counterfoil was completed on 18th
April 1987, two days after the death. It records that Shipman last saw Mrs Thomas alive on the day of death, that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that he had seen the body after death. The cause of death was cerebrovascular accident.
Shipman completed cremation Form B on 18th
April. He recorded that Mrs Thomas had died at 11.55am, that he had been her ordinary medical attendant for a period of nine years and that he had attended her during her last illness for
'30-40 minutes'
. He said that he had last seen Mrs Thomas alive 40 minutes before her death and that he had seen the body immediately after her death. The cause of death was said to be right-sided cerebrovascular accident. The mode of death is recorded to have been
'progressive coma'
lasting
'no more than 20 minutes'
. Shipman's views as to mode and cause of death were said to be based on his own observations. He said that he was present at the death. No one had nursed Mrs Thomas during her last illness.
Conclusion
There are several reasons to suspect that Shipman might have killed Mrs Thomas.
Mrs Thomas' medical records have not been recovered and so little is known about her medical condition prior to death. However, the fact that she had suffered a number of strokes in the past would put her at increased risk of further stroke. Mr Thomas has also said that his mother's face was 'extremely distorted', a feature that would point towards her having suffered a stroke. Mrs Randall described Mrs Thomas' face as 'drooping' on one side, which might also indicate that she had had a stroke. However, the rest of the evidence suggests that Shipman unlawfully killed Mrs Thomas.
The most suspicious feature is that Shipman was present at the moment of Mrs Thomas' death. She told her son, the day before she died, that she was expecting Shipman to attend for a check-up. His visit was, therefore, routine and not in response to an emergency such as the onset of new symptoms which might suggest an illness which carried a risk of sudden and unexpected death. Had there been such an emergency, this would almost certainly have been mentioned at the time by Shipman or Mrs Ridgeway or both.
In his generic evidence to the Inquiry, Dr John Grenville said that it would be most unusual for a patient to die during a routine visit. Such an event might happen once in a doctor's professional lifetime. Shipman claimed to have been present at the deaths of a number of his patients and this cannot be explained by coincidence. That Mrs Thomas died during a routine visit by Shipman is a highly suspicious factor in its own right.
On Form B, Shipman said that he saw Mrs Thomas 40 minutes before she died. However, when read in conjunction with his other answers, it is clear that he meant that he arrived at her house about 40 minutes before the death. It appears that he diagnosed a right-sided stroke and that she then entered a progressive coma, which lasted for about 20 minutes, before she died at 11.55am. If events really had occurred in this way, not only would it have been an enormous coincidence that Shipman happened to arrive at the crucial time, but also Shipman would have behaved very differently. If a doctor had found Mrs Thomas showing signs of having a developing stroke, he would certainly have tried to contact her relatives or a neighbour. Several of Mrs Thomas' relatives lived in the area. Most doctors in that position would probably have summoned an ambulance as well. Shipman did neither. Mrs Randall thought that this was strange at the time and she is right.
I am also suspicious about Shipman's claim that this right-sided stroke led so quickly to Mrs Thomas' death. The type of stroke which causes a weakness on one side of the body is usually an occlusive stoke occurring in the upper part of the brain. Such strokes are not usually fatal and most patients recover with varying degrees of residual disability. However, such a stroke can progress, in which case the patient will usually suffer a gradual loss of consciousness leading to death. The process usually lasts about two to three days. The type of stroke that can lead to sudden death is usually a haemorrhagic stroke in the brain stem, which does not produce weakness on one side of the body.
Shipman's action in leaving a note and the MCCD with Mrs Ridgeway is rather an unusual procedure for a doctor to follow after a death. This note would have served to prevent the involvement of other agencies such as the police and the ambulance service, with the attendant likelihood that the death would be referred to the coroner. It seems likely to me that Shipman left the note and certificate because he wished to avoid a referral to the coroner.
I think it is likely that Shipman killed Mrs Thomas. The weight of the evidence suggests that he did. However, I must give weight to the observations of Mr Thomas and Mrs Randall who noted that Mrs Thomas' face was distorted or drooping at one side. There are two possible explanations for this. One is that Mrs Thomas' face had been 'distorted' by her earlier strokes and once the muscles were relaxed in death this appearance was more noticeable than it was when she was alive and awake. Another possible explanation is that Shipman found Mrs Thomas in the early stages of a further stroke. Rather than calling a relative and then waiting to see whether or not the stroke developed, he decided to ensure that the stroke would be fatal.
My conclusion is that Shipman probably killed Mrs Thomas, by giving her a lethal injection of opiate. I stop short of saying that I am sure of that conclusion because it is possible that Mrs Thomas died of a right-sided stroke.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001