The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Maria Thornton
Introduction
Miss Maria Thornton was found dead at her home, 369 Stockport Road, Gee Cross, Hyde on Thursday, 28th
July 1994 at the age of 78. She lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and she had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to arteriosclerosis and that she died on 28th
July 1994. It is clear that she did not die on that day.
The police investigated Miss Thornton's death after Professor Richard Baker informed them in January 2001 that on the basis of the information contained in the cremation certificate and the medical records he regarded the death as highly suspicious. The police took statements from Mrs Patricia Lamb, Miss Thornton's niece, and Mrs Barbara Johnson, Miss Thornton's hairdresser. The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Miss Thornton but an inquest into her death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Lamb. The Inquiry has also had access to Miss Thornton's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documentation for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Lamb and Mrs Johnson both describe Miss Thornton as a very active lady. She was a retired teacher. She enjoyed walking holidays and, up to the time of her death, she attended keep fit classes. She was a member of the local WRVS and, together with her friend, Mrs Kathleen Grundy, helped to serve lunch at the Werneth House day centre three times a week. She smoked a few cigarettes a day, not more than a packet a week.
Miss Thornton did not often require the attention of her doctor. The Lloyd George folder containing her medical records is remarkably slim for a woman of her age. She did not suffer from any serious illnesses. For some years, varicose veins in both legs had troubled her, worse in the left. She was referred to Professor Gillespie at Manchester Royal Infirmary in July 1992, on account of pain in the left leg. He concluded that the symptoms were probably due to a degree of arterial ischaemia. Miss Thornton also suffered episodes of vertigo for which she was prescribed Stemetil. Her blood pressure was only slightly raised on the two occasions it was taken shortly before her death.
Mrs Lamb was in regular telephone contact with her aunt in the weeks before her death. Miss Thornton did not mention that she was feeling unwell or suffering from any illness. She was looking forward to a visit from Mrs Lamb in early August and the two were planning an outing to Chester.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
Miss Thornton had a regular hair appointment at 5.30pm on Friday afternoons at the salon near her home on Stockport Road. On Friday, 22nd
July 1994, she cancelled her appointment at short notice. She telephoned Mrs Johnson, the hairdresser, to say that she 'could not be bothered' to come in. Mrs Johnson was surprised that Miss Thornton had not called in, as she lived very near to the salon.
There is an entry in the practice visits book for Saturday, 23rd
July, which suggests that Miss Thornton had requested a visit that day. The entry reads:
'Marie
(
sic
)
Thornton
369 S/port Road
Keeps falling
can't get down on Bus'
.
There is also an entry dated 23rd
July in the Lloyd George notes that suggests that Shipman visited on that day. It says:
'23/7/94V
(
visit
)
Fell 2/52 ago
speech odd slurred some
dysphagia
legs feel weak 160/100
power
(L) leg
minor CVA
Aspirin 75mg TOD'
.
For reasons that I will discuss below, I am suspicious that the entry in the Lloyd George notes might not have been made on 23rd
July, as it purports to have been. Dr Grenville interprets this entry to suggest that Shipman visited Miss Thornton on Saturday, 23rd
July and she told him that she had fallen two weeks before (that would not be inconsistent with the receptionist's note). Shipman then says that Miss Thornton's speech was odd and slurred. She had some dysphagia, which means a difficulty in swallowing. Her legs felt weak. Her blood pressure was 160/100, which was slightly raised. There was reduced power in the left leg. Shipman diagnosed a minor stroke. He prescribed 75mg of aspirin, which would thin the blood.
In the computerised records the entry dated 23rd July reads:
'H/O: CVA
2/52 aspirin 75 weal
(
sic
)
left side'
.
I interpret this to suggest that Miss Thornton gave a history of a stroke or described symptoms that sounded like a stroke two weeks earlier. She was told to take aspirin.
The Day of the Death
At about 3pm on Wednesday, 27th
July, Mrs Johnson saw Miss Thornton sweeping her front garden. Miss Thornton explained that she had had a fall in her garden the previous Friday and that she had hurt her leg. She said that Shipman had been to see her on the Saturday. She was expecting him to visit her again that afternoon. She said she was going to leave her front door ajar for him. Miss Thornton also asked Mrs Johnson to get her something for her lunch the following day. Mrs Johnson said she would be busy but would ask another friend, Mrs Gladys King, to deliver Miss Thornton's lunch. Mrs King is now elderly and unwell and it has not been possible to obtain a statement from her.
There is an entry in the practice visits book for Wednesday, 27th
July, the day of this conversation, which reads:
'Maria Thornton
369 S/Port Road
Re-visit'
.
Entries of that nature were usually made by the practice staff on Shipman's instructions and indicate that he has made the decision to visit, rather than the patient having requested a visit.
The handwritten medical record for that day reads:
'1520 hrs CVA
150/90 (L) leg weak (L) plantar
Chat re hospital or D&V
W&S
(
wait and see
)
revisit
FRI
'
.
Dr Grenville has interpreted this note to suggest that Shipman visited at 3.20 pm. He recorded that Miss Thornton had had a stroke. Her blood pressure was 150/90. The left leg was weak and the left plantar reflex was upgoing, which is abnormal and indicates that the patient has suffered a stroke. Shipman says that he talked to Miss Thornton about admission to hospital or a domiciliary visit from a consultant but no conclusion is recorded. The plan appeared to be to wait and see and for Shipman to revisit on the Friday.
The Discovery of the Death
At about noon on Thursday, 28th July, Mrs King took some lunch to Miss Thornton's house but there was no reply. Mrs King went to the salon to fetch Mrs Johnson and the two women went back to Miss Thornton's. Through the window, Mrs Johnson could see that the internal doors were open, which was unusual as Miss Thornton normally kept them shut. Later in the afternoon, Mrs Johnson returned to the house with a key and let herself in. She found Miss Thornton sitting at the kitchen table, fully dressed with her spectacles in her hand. A newspaper was open on the table in front of her. Mrs Johnson realised that Miss Thornton was dead.
Mrs Johnson telephoned the Market Street Surgery and asked Shipman to visit. The receptionist observed that Shipman had visited Miss Thornton the previous day. Shipman arrived within minutes. Mrs Johnson does not recall Shipman examining Miss Thornton but does recall him saying that Miss Thornton had died at about 6.15pm the previous evening. Shipman also said that she had suffered a stroke at the weekend. He made arrangements for Massey's, the undertakers, to attend and remove the body. His handwritten note reads:
'28.7.94 V
(
visit
)
found
by neighbour
3.30 today. Cold dead last
night'
.
I interpret that to suggest that Shipman had visited and had been told that a neighbour had found Miss Thornton dead at 3.30pm. The body was cold and Shipman thought she had died the previous night.
Miss Thornton's death came as a great shock to her niece, Mrs Lamb, as it was completely unexpected.
Certification
On 28th
July, Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). He said that death had occurred on 28th
July 1994 and stated that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident due to arteriosclerosis. He said that he had last seen Miss Thornton alive on 27th
July; that is, the day before the day on which he said the death occurred. He stated that the approximate interval between the onset of the cerebrovascular accident and death was two weeks. Shipman stated that Miss Thornton had suffered from arteriosclerosis for a period of ten months.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that death had occurred during the evening of 27th
July 1994. He said that he had attended Miss Thornton during her last illness over a period of five days. He had last seen her alive
'Apparently'
or
'Approximately'
(the writing is not clear) six hours before her death. He said he saw her body 24 hours after death, when he performed a complete external examination. Shipman stated that the mode of death was collapse of seconds' duration. This can only have been supposition as he said that no one had been present at the moment of death. In response to question 11 (as to whether the answers to the questions as to cause and mode of death were given on the basis of Shipman's own observations or on statements made by others), Shipman wrote:
'own found by neighbour collapsed onto table when sat eating her tea, when she called to deliver her bread'
.
There is no evidence that Miss Thornton had been eating her tea when she collapsed at the table. There is no evidence that food was found on the table, only a newspaper. She had her spectacles in her hand. It appears to me that the entries in Form B are designed to give the impression that Miss Thornton died in the evening of 27th
July. As Shipman has made up the evidence about eating tea, I infer that he has made a false entry in order to create a misleading impression that the death occurred well after his own visit in the middle of the afternoon. I observe also that his replies are internally inconsistent as he says that he saw the body 24 hours after the death. As he saw the body at 3.30pm, he seems to be saying that the death occurred in the middle of the afternoon on 27th
July. There is also a glaring inconsistency as to the date of death between the information given on the MCCD and Form B.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville said that Miss Thornton appears to have been a fit, active and generally healthy lady. In his view, the combination of smoking, slightly raised blood pressure and known peripheral vascular disease put her at a moderately increased risk of suffering a stroke or heart attack.
Dr Grenville observed that the history and examination recorded by Shipman on Saturday, 23rd
July 1994 are, if genuine, suggestive of a stroke with some significant disability. He questions the genuineness of that entry because it is at odds with the witness evidence, in particular the evidence that Miss Thornton was sweeping her garden in the afternoon of 27th
July.
I too am suspicious of the genuineness of that entry for the reason given by Dr Grenville. However, I am also suspicious of the manuscript entry apparently made on 23rd
July, for other reasons. First, the date, 23rd
July, has been altered from 27th
July. Second, the last three manuscript entries (those dated 23rd
, 27th
and 28th
July), all appear to have been written with the same pen. I have examined the original card. Moreover, Shipman had not used Miss Thornton's Lloyd George cards for over a year at this time. All the more recent entries had been made only on the computer. Third, the complaint recorded on 23rd
July is not consistent with the reason given by Miss Thornton when she requested a visit on that day. It is recorded in the visits book that she 'kept falling'. She said nothing about any of the other problems that Shipman has recorded as present on that day. If Mrs Johnson's recollection is right, the reason why Miss Thornton called Shipman out on the 23rd
seems likely to have been that she had had a fall that day and hurt her leg. She might well have said that she 'kept falling', as her medical notes reveal that she had had two episodes of vertigo in the recent past, one in April and one in May. The notes do not reveal whether or not she fell on those occasions. They are characteristically scanty.
Dr Grenville observed that the history given in the notes is of a gradually developing stroke. It is likely that such a stroke would be an occlusive one but such strokes do not usually cause sudden death. If they are going to develop, they do so over a period of two to three days and the patient deteriorates gradually. It is a haemorrhagic stroke in the brain stem that causes sudden death. Even in a brain stem haemorrhagic stroke, Dr Grenville would not expect death to be so sudden that the patient would be found sitting at the table, as if reading a newspaper. In his experience, a patient suffering a haemorrhagic stroke would have at least a few seconds of conscious realisation that something dreadful was happening and would be likely to try to move to call for help.
Dr Grenville also pointed out that it would have been impossible for Shipman to give an accurate estimate of the time of death on the information apparently available to him on the afternoon of 28th
July.
In concluding that the death was highly suspicious, Professor Richard Baker commented that the death was a sudden death, that the cause of death was stated to be cerebrovascular accident and that there had been a recent visit by Shipman and a discussion as to admission to hospital. He concluded that these factors, when taken together, were suspicious.
Conclusion
There are many suspicious features surrounding this death. The death was discovered soon after a visit by Shipman. There is no evidence that anyone saw Miss Thornton alive or spoke to her after Shipman's visit on 27th
July. That in itself is highly suspicious.
Bearing in mind Mrs Johnson's evidence that Miss Thornton was sweeping her garden on the afternoon of 27th
July, I think it extremely unlikely that she had had a stroke. I think it far more likely that she had fallen on Friday, 22nd
July and had hurt her leg. I think she probably decided to call Shipman because she had had a number of dizzy spells in the previous months and the medication had not prevented a recurrence. I am fortified in that view by the fact that Mrs Lamb was quite unaware that her aunt was ill in the days before her death. I think Miss Thornton would have told her niece if she knew she had suffered a stroke. Her niece was coming to stay in a few days' time.
Dr Grenville suggests that, if Shipman's accounts were genuine and Miss Thornton had suffered a stroke, the history given indicates a gradually developing stroke. It is likely that such a stroke would be occlusive and therefore unlikely to cause sudden death. As set out above, Dr Grenville noted that, where a stroke causes sudden death, it is usually a brain stem haemorrhagic stroke. In Dr Grenville's opinion, the position in which Miss Thornton was found was inconsistent even with that type of stroke.
Shipman's note in relation to the visit on Saturday, 23rd
July, records a history of Miss Thornton having fallen two weeks prior to the visit. It then goes immediately into a description of the signs and symptoms of a stroke. There is no independent evidence that Miss Thornton ever showed any such signs or spoke of such symptoms. For the reasons I explained above, I suspect that this entry was a late fabrication. The reason for fabricating such a note is likely to be because Shipman had to provide an explanation for a death that he had caused.
I am persuaded that Miss Thornton did not have a stroke at all and her death must have had some other cause. Given what we know of Shipman's unlawful activities, the most obvious alternative cause is that he killed her. He certainly had the opportunity. He made false entries on Form B, designed to give the impression that the death occurred in the evening and not in the afternoon when he had visited. Miss Thornton's appearance in death was entirely typical of that of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of diamorphine.
Taking all these factors into account, I have come to the conclusion that Shipman must have killed Miss Thornton. I find that, when he visited her on 23rd
July, she had fallen and injured her leg. She did not display signs of a stroke. He made an entry on the computer but did not make a handwritten note. On 27th
July, he visited Miss Thornton and gave her an injection of strong opiate, almost certainly diamorphine, and left her dead, sitting at the kitchen table. He was not called out to examine her body until the following day. He then made a series of written notes in her medical records. He made entries in Form B which were designed to suggest that Miss Thornton had died some hours after his visit. I am satisfied so as to be sure of the conclusion that Shipman killed Miss Thornton.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001