The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Tuff
Introduction
Mrs Mary Tuff died at her home, 44 Cambourne Road, Hattersley, Hyde on Monday, 21st
April 1997 at the age of 76. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of her death was congestive heart failure.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the information contained in the cremation certificate, the death of Mrs Tuff was highly suspicious.
The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Linda Page, Mrs Tuff's daughter, and her husband, Mr David Page.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Tuff but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mr and Mrs Page and has had access to Mrs Tuff's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Tuff was a widow and lived alone. Mr and Mrs Page lived next door.
Mrs Tuff suffered from chronic obstructive airways disease (COAD) and bronchitis for which she was seen at the chest clinic at Tameside General Hospital. As a result of this chronic illness, Mrs Tuff tended to suffer from chest infections. Apart from these problems, she enjoyed quite good health. Shipman did not visit her regularly.
In November 1996, Shipman referred Mrs Tuff to Tameside General Hospital for a chest x-ray. The report noted that her heart was enlarged and the vessels of the upper lobes of the lungs were distended, indicating a degree of pulmonary venous hypertension. However, there were no definite signs of pleural effusion or pulmonary oedema. On the back of the x-ray report, someone has noted that Mrs Tuff had telephoned the surgery to ask about the results of her x-ray. She wanted the results to be explained to her. Shipman wrote above that request, presumably so that the explanation could be passed on to her by the practice staff:
'As expected
heart enlarged
rest of lung signs of age
only'
.
What Mrs Tuff understood, I do not know. Probably the message would be one of reassurance. It would appear that the heart was enlarged as a consequence of chronic obstructive airways disease.
The Days Leading up to the Day of Death
On Tuesday, 15th
April 1997, Shipman prescribed an antibiotic for Mrs Tuff, although it appears that he did not see her. Her name appears in the acute prescriptions book on the previous day, which suggests that she telephoned to ask for a prescription. Mrs Page recalls that her mother was complaining of neck and head pain. Mrs Page thinks that Shipman said that Mrs Tuff had arthritis in her neck combined with a 'septic throat' for which he prescribed an antibiotic. Shipman's computerised records confirm that Mrs Tuff saw him on 1st
April, when he diagnosed cervical spondylosis, and that she had a sore throat on 15th
April. It seems likely that Mrs Page has mistakenly combined these two separate incidents in her mind. There is no reference to either visit in the handwritten medical records.
According to the visits book and a visits request form, Mrs Tuff telephoned the surgery at 1.30pm on 16th
April 1997 to ask for a visit. The visits book says:
'Mary Tuff. 1.30 - full of pain all over/shivering
not well. Given Amoxycillin yesterday'
.
The computerised medical records suggest that Shipman visited. He noted that she had a very sore throat and thought she had a viral illness.
Mrs Page recollects that Shipman visited her mother again on Friday, 18th
April 1997. However, there is no record of this in the visits book or the medical records. It is quite possible that he did visit but did not make any record. When he later came to certify the cause of her death, he said that he last seen Mrs Tuff alive on 18th
April.
On Sunday, 20th
April 1997, Mrs Page went to her mother's house at about 11am and stayed with her until about 7.30pm. Her mother seemed to be recovering from her recent illness. However, shortly after Mrs Page returned home, her mother came round to her house and knocked on the patio window. Mrs Page went over to her mother's house where Mrs Tuff said that she felt hot and had a pain in her chest. Mrs Page telephoned the surgery number and the person to whom she spoke, which may have been the deputising service, promised that the emergency doctor would visit but said that there might be some delay. Mrs Page was slightly surprised that this was not going to be Shipman, because in the past he had always come out himself in an emergency. While waiting for the doctor to arrive, Mrs Tuff's condition improved again and it was decided that the request for a visit should be cancelled. This was done at about 10.30pm. Soon afterwards, Mrs Page left her mother, who was by that time feeling much better.
The Day of the Death
On Monday, 21st
April, Mrs Tuff had an appointment at about lunchtime at the chest clinic at Tameside General Hospital and Mrs Page intended to accompany her.
At about 7.45am that morning, Mrs Page left home for work. As she walked past her mother's house, she noticed that the venetian blinds were still closed and she could not see whether any lights were on. Later, a neighbour told her that a light had been on in the night. Mrs Page was already late for work and did not look in on her mother.
During the next hour or so, Mr Page, who was at home, became aware that he could not hear his mother-in-law moving about in the house next door. He telephoned her but there was no reply so he went round to her house. This would have been at about 9.15am. He let himself in with a spare key. Inside the house, he found his mother-in-law lying on the living room floor in a position that suggested that she had collapsed as she walked towards the telephone, which was near the door. She was wearing her pyjamas and dressing gown.
Mr Page telephoned his wife. Mrs Page remembers that her husband told her that he had found Mrs Tuff in the living room, that she was very cold and that he thought that she was dead. Mrs Page went to the house immediately. She saw her mother on the floor. She called for the emergency services. The police and ambulance attended. The paramedics lifted Mrs Tuff onto the settee. Soon after that, Shipman arrived. He had probably been summoned by one of the ambulance personnel. Shipman felt for Mrs Tuff's pulse. He told Mrs Page that her mother had had a massive heart attack and would have been dead
'before she hit the floor'
. He added that he hoped that when his time came he could go like that.
Mrs Page noticed that there was an empty bowl in the kitchen sink. Because of this and because her mother had her dentures in, Mrs Page deduced that her mother must have got up and eaten breakfast that morning. Mrs Page is of the opinion that Mrs Tuff would have got up early that morning because of her appointment.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) on 21st
April 1997. He wrote that he had last seen Mrs Tuff alive on 18th
April 1997 and that he had seen her body after her death. He certified that the cause of death was congestive heart failure and said that chronic obstructive airways disease had contributed to the death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation forms. He there said that Mrs Tuff had died at about
'06.00 hours'
on 21st
April 1997. The cause of death was stated as on the MCCD. Shipman said he had last seen Mrs Tuff alive three days before her death. He said that he had attended Mrs Tuff for six days during her last illness. As the last illness is supposed to be related to the cause of death, this implies that Mrs Tuff had been suffering from congestive heart failure for six days before her death. However, there is nothing in the medical records to suggest that she had had anything other than a viral illness and sore throat in the last six days. Nor is there any reference in the medical notes to congestive heart failure until the day of the death, when the note says simply:
'O/e dead chf
Seen in own home'
.
The only reference in the medical records that might suggest a diagnosis of congestive heart failure comes from the report of the November 1996 x-ray. However, Shipman did not describe the results as congestive heart failure and did not treat Mrs Tuff for that condition.
On Form B, Shipman said that he had seen the body six hours after death and that he had made a complete external examination of it. He said that the mode of death was syncope lasting seconds. He said, inaccurately, that Mrs Tuff had been found dead by her daughter.
He wrote:
'Found by daughter dead
when seen rigor mortis present body temp.
gave about 6 hours dead'
.
The Expert Evidence
On the basis of the contents of the cremation certificate, Professor Baker thought the case was highly suspicious. Professor Baker has not examined the medical records.
Conclusion
There are some features of this case which excite suspicion.
Shipman certified that the death was due to congestive heart failure, although there was nothing in Mrs Tuff's medical records to suggest that she had ever suffered from that condition. He also claimed that she had been suffering from her last illness for six days, when the records show that, during that time, she had had a viral illness and sore throat. It is true that Mrs Tuff had an enlarged heart as a result of chronic obstructive airways disease, but this enlargement was not causing any clinical symptoms. Mrs Tuff's death was sudden and unexpected and Shipman was not in a position confidently to certify the cause of death. He should have referred the case to the coroner. These factors give rise to suspicion that he was involved in the death.
Shipman claimed on Form B that he was able to estimate the time of death from the body temperature. He often made such claims and they were completely bogus. Dr John Grenville says that it is very difficult to estimate the time of death from body temperature. It is a task for an experienced pathologist. In any event, it is necessary to take the body temperature internally, usually in the rectum. Shipman did not do that. In many cases where he has killed a patient, Shipman claimed to estimate the time of death and gave a time some hours after his last known visit. His motive in such cases is clear. He was seeking to distance himself from the death. His claim to know the time of death raises some suspicion. In this case, there is no evidence that he visited Mrs Tuff in the hours before her death was discovered. It is possible that he visited her late at night or very early in the morning, although this seems unlikely. If he had not visited her, his only motive for pretending that he could estimate the time of her death was that he was showing off.
Despite these grounds for suspicion, however, the other circumstances suggest that Mrs Tuff died from natural causes. First, on the day before she died, although she seemed to have recovered from her recent infection, she became unwell again and specifically complained of chest pain. This pain could have been the precursor to a fatal heart attack some hours later. However, there is no record of any history of ischaemic heart disease or congestive heart failure. Second, the position in which she was found was consistent with her having suffered a heart attack and having made an attempt to reach the telephone when she realised that something was seriously wrong.
There are one or two unexplained features of the evidence. It appears that a neighbour noticed that a light was on during the night. It is possible that Mrs Tuff felt ill in the night and put the light on. It is possible that she died in the middle of the night. The other matter is that it appears that Mrs Tuff had had something to eat after her daughter left her at 10.30pm on the Sunday. Mrs Page thought that the bowl in the sink was evidence of her mother's early breakfast. It might equally well have been a late supper. Neither of those factors is particularly suggestive of a late visit by Shipman.
It is possible that the request for a visit on Sunday evening reached Shipman who had set off to visit before the request was cancelled. It is possible that he arrived late at night, when Mrs Tuff had had some supper and changed into her nightclothes. He might then have given her a lethal injection of opiate and waited until she collapsed. If he had done so, he might well have wished to pretend that he could estimate that she died at 6am.
The evidence in this case is such that I do not feel able to reach any positive conclusion as to whether Mrs Tuff died of natural causes or was killed by Shipman.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001