The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Frances Elizabeth Turner
Introduction
Miss Frances Elizabeth Turner died at her home, 36 Peveril Terrace, Hyde on Friday, 23rd
August 1985 at the age of 85. She was a patient of Shipman and he certified that the cause of her death was old age due to arteriosclerosis.
Following publication of Professor Richard Baker's report in January 2001, the police investigated Miss Turner's death. They interviewed Mrs Elsie Hibbert (a former social worker) and Mrs Edith Tilson and Mrs Lena Hodkinson (former neighbours of Miss Turner). They did not take formal statements.
An inquest into Miss Turner's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Hibbert and has had access to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period, as well as to the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation. Miss Turner's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Turner lived alone and, so far as is known, she had no surviving relatives. It appears that she had a hip replacement operation in April 1985. Mrs Hibbert first came into contact with Miss Turner in July 1985. She thinks it is likely that when Miss Turner was discharged from hospital, she was referred to Tameside Social Services for assessment of her care needs. Mrs Hibbert remembers Miss Turner as quite frail but articulate and independent. She was slim and neat. She told Mrs Hibbert that she wished to stay at her home and did not want to go into a nursing home. She did not complain of any health problems.
Following the assessment, Mrs Hibbert referred Miss Turner's case to the home help organiser at Hyde Town Hall. About two weeks later, Mrs Hibbert called on Miss Turner to tell her the outcome of the assessment. Miss Turner let her in and Mrs Hibbert spent about 15 minutes explaining what arrangements were to be made to assist her. Mrs Hibbert does not recall noticing any change in Miss Turner's condition during those two weeks. Mrs Hibbert says that she last saw Miss Turner in July 1985.
Mrs Tilson and Mrs Hodkinson told the police that they remembered Miss Turner suffering a fall and breaking her arm and hip. It is likely that it was this episode which resulted in the hip replacement operation in April 1985. They recall that following the fall, Miss Turner was housebound and, as she did not have any relatives, neighbours helped with her shopping. Neither Mrs Tilson nor Mrs Hodkinson is able to recall Miss Turner's state of health in the days leading up to her death and neither saw her on the day of her death.
The Day of the Death
Miss Turner's name was one of eight patients whose name appeared in Shipman's visits book for Friday, 23rd
August 1985. The number
'5'
appears against it, which probably indicates that she was the fifth patient that Shipman intended to visit that day.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been recovered. On that, Shipman stated that Miss Turner died at her home on 23rd
August. He said he had last seen her alive four days earlier on 19th
August. He said he had seen the body after death and that there would be no post-mortem examination. He certified that the immediate cause of death was old age due to arteriosclerosis. Hypothyroidism was said to have contributed to the death but was not related to the immediate cause of death. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 23rd
August 1985.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that the death occurred at 1.30pm. He said that he had attended Miss Turner during her last illness for over six months. He claimed that he had last seen her alive two days before the death. He also said that he was present at the moment of death and had seen the body immediately after death. He said that he had performed an external examination. The cause of death was as stated on the MCCD counterfoil. The mode of death was said to be syncope lasting only minutes. He said that these answers were based on his own observations. He said that no one had nursed Miss Turner during her last illness.
Although on the MCCD counterfoil Shipman claimed to have seen Miss Turner alive on 19th
August 1985, her name does not appear in his visits book for that date. Nor does it appear on 21st
August, two days before death, when Shipman claimed on Form B that he had last seen her alive. Examination of the visits book for the months of May, June, July and August shows that Shipman did not record an intention to visit her during that time. This shows the falsity of Shipman's claim that he had been attending Miss Turner for six months during her 'last illness'. Of course, it is possible that Miss Turner attended at the surgery during that time, and even on one of the two specific dates on which Shipman claimed to have last seen her alive. However, that would be entirely inconsistent with her condition having deteriorated to such an extent that her death could properly be certified as having been caused by old age on 23rd
August.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Baker considered the cremation forms in this case and concluded that Miss Turner's death was moderately suspicious.
Conclusion
Very little is known about the circumstances surrounding Miss Turner's death. However, there are several reasons to suspect that Shipman killed her. The first is that she appears to have died in his presence. In his generic evidence, Dr John Grenville advised that it is most unusual for a patient to die during a routine visit of a general practitioner, where the patient is not terminally ill and the doctor is not responding to an emergency call following the onset of acute symptoms indicating, for example, a heart attack. He has said that this might be expected to occur once in a general practitioner's professional lifetime. Shipman was present at the deaths of a number of his patients who died at home and this repeated 'coincidence' gives rise to grave suspicion. So far as is known, Miss Turner was not suffering from a terminal illness. It is likely that she called Shipman out on the day of her death, as her name appears in his visits book. However, it does not appear that the request was a matter of urgency. Shipman put her in fifth position on his list. If Miss Turner had told the receptionist of symptoms which sounded like a heart attack or stroke, I would have expected Shipman to give her priority or for the surgery staff to have arranged for an ambulance to attend. In any event, Shipman himself did not suggest that Miss Turner died as the result of some sudden event such as a stroke or heart attack. In my view, the fact that Miss Turner died during what was probably a routine visit by Shipman is a highly suspicious factor.
Shipman claims that Miss Turner died of old age. In his generic evidence, Dr Grenville has explained that it is only appropriate to give old age as the cause of death where the elderly patient has deteriorated gradually over a significant period of time until he or she has reached a moribund state. The patient will almost always have become bedridden and will have required nursing care. The death will have been expected. In such circumstances, it might be difficult for the doctor to determine the specific cause of death and it is then appropriate to certify the cause as old age. On Form B, Shipman recorded that Miss Turner had not received nursing care during her last illness. That is clearly inconsistent with the gradual deterioration described by Dr Grenville. There are a number of patients killed by Shipman (among them Shipman's last victim, Mrs Kathleen Grundy), where Shipman has certified that the death was due to old age when it was clearly inappropriate. In those cases, it appears to me that Shipman has put 'old age' because the medical records revealed no plausible explanation for the death. The fact that Shipman certified this death as being due to old age when Miss Turner had not required nursing is a highly suspicious factor.
I am also slightly suspicious about the inconsistencies between Shipman's various accounts of when he last saw Miss Turner alive. However, as he has admitted that he was present at the death, it seems likely that those inconsistencies are more likely explained as due to muddle and incompetence than as a deliberate attempt to mislead.
There are two major grounds for suspicion here. Despite Miss Turner's advanced years, her frail state of health and the absence of her medical records, what is known of this death shows features which are so typical of cases in which Shipman killed that I have come to the conclusion that he probably killed her. It is likely that he did this in his usual way, by administering a lethal injection of opiate.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001