The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Taylor
Introduction
Miss Mary Taylor died at her home, 26 St John's Drive, Hyde on Monday, 28th
November 1983 at the age of 78. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was senility.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the information contained in the cremation certificate, Miss Taylor's death was moderately suspicious. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Beryl Louisa Mary Dickinson, who was a friend of Miss Taylor. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Dickinson, Mr David Charlton and Mr Peter Charlton (Miss Taylor's nephews) and Mrs Mary Prosser, Miss Taylor's home care aide. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1983, the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book, the cremation forms and the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD).
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Taylor had never married and lived alone. She suffered from bronchial problems and often seemed to have a bad chest. The evidence suggests that her health deteriorated with age. She became forgetful and, about 12 months before she died, she began to receive daily visits from a home help. The Inquiry has been unable to identify the home help.
Mrs Prosser, the home care aide, began to visit Miss Taylor about three or four weeks before her death. A home care aide provides a high level of support for those who become unable to cope alone. Mrs Prosser would visit three times a day. She recalls that Miss Taylor was a small and frail lady. Miss Taylor did not have a telephone and relied on others to contact the doctor for her, although she was generally reluctant to consult a doctor.
The Day before Death
Mrs Dickinson last saw Miss Taylor alive on the afternoon of Sunday, 27th
November 1983. Although Miss Taylor did not seem to be in perfect health, she was no worse than usual. She made no complaint of any illness, although generally she was not one to complain about her state of health.
Mrs Prosser last saw Miss Taylor alive at about 5pm that day. She recalls that Miss Taylor was quite chirpy and that she made no mention of being unwell or of wishing to see a doctor. However, she said that she was going to bed early that night. Mrs Prosser left Miss Taylor just before 6pm and recalls that, after she left, Miss Taylor put a security chain across the door.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Prosser returned to Miss Taylor's flat at about 8.15am on 28th
November 1983, but there was no reply when she knocked at the door. It was Miss Taylor's usual practice to hang a key behind the letterbox so that, if the door were locked, Mrs Prosser could put her hand through the letterbox and use the key to let herself in. On this occasion, Mrs Prosser was unable to open the door because the security chain was still in place.
Mrs Prosser went to a neighbour's flat and telephoned Social Services and for an ambulance. At some stage, Miss Taylor's home help arrived and entered Miss Taylor's flat through a window. The home help opened the front door and let Mrs Prosser into the property and together they went through to the bedroom where they saw Miss Taylor lying on her bed. It was obvious that she had died. Mrs Prosser was very upset and shocked because she had had no concerns about Miss Taylor when she had left her the previous night. Mrs Prosser recalls that it appeared that Miss Taylor had died while getting ready for bed. The sheets on the bed were folded back. Miss Taylor had her hairnet on and had unrolled her stocking, which was at her ankle. It appeared that she had been sitting up and had fallen sideways while still holding her stocking. She had a peaceful look on her face as if she had just closed her eyes and fallen asleep. There were traces of vomit on the pillow. Miss Taylor was very cold and it was obvious to Mrs Prosser that she had been dead for some time.
The Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book reveals that Shipman was not working on the evening of 27th
November 1983.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman wrote that the death had occurred on 28th
November and that he had last seen Miss Taylor alive on 7th
October 1983. There is, however, no reference to Miss Taylor's name in Shipman's visits book for this date, although her name does appear on the page for 10th
October. He said that the death was due to senility.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He recorded that Miss Taylor had died in the
'early hours'
of 28th
November 1983. He recorded that he had been her ordinary medical attendant and that he had attended her during her last illness for six years. He recorded that he had last seen her alive 21 days before her death. He had seen her body 12 hours after death. He said that Miss Taylor had died in her sleep and that his answers as to mode and cause of death were based on his own observations. He noted that Miss Taylor had been found dead by
'neighbour/police'
. No one was said to have been present at the moment of death. Shipman recorded that he had spoken to the coroner's assistant, who had agreed to his issuing a certificate. He presumably made this contact because 21 days had elapsed since his most recent contact with his patient.
When investigating the death in 2001, the police spoke to Mrs Margaret Blake, the South Manchester Coroner's Officer, who explained her understanding that, if a general practitioner had not seen a patient during the 14 day period immediately prior to death, he could only issue the MCCD after consultation with the coroner. On the back of the MCCD is a 'Box A' which a general practitioner would tick to indicate he had consulted with the coroner. Mrs Blake said that, in such circumstances, she would issue a Form 100A to confirm that the general practitioner had liaised with the coroner and that the coroner 'agreed' that the general practitioner should issue the MCCD. The Form 100A would then be forwarded to the register office for information and filing. A record is also kept at the coroner's office to show when a Form 100A has been issued. Mrs Blake informed the police that Form 100A records are in existence for 1983, but that there is no record of a Form 100A ever having been issued in respect of Miss Taylor's death.
There does exist, however, a police Report of Death to HM Coroner form in respect of Miss Taylor's death. This records that Shipman had telephoned the coroner's office and said that he was willing to certify the death, although he had not seen Miss Taylor for 21 days. The form records that Shipman was willing to certify the cause of death as old age.
Conclusion
Little is known about Miss Taylor's health in the period before her death. It appears that she had become frail and forgetful but she was still living alone, with the assistance of her home help and home care aide. The evidence does not suggest that her health had declined to the point where she had become confined to bed or was dependent on nursing care. To that extent, her death must be regarded as unexpected and this does not appear to be the kind of case where it is appropriate to certify the cause of death as senility or old age.
If there were any evidence that Shipman had made contact with Miss Taylor, I would say that there was some slight suspicion that he might have killed her. However, the evidence is remarkably clear considering that this death took place nearly 20 years ago. The available documentary evidence suggests that Shipman had not seen Miss Taylor for about three weeks before her death. More significantly, there is evidence that she put the security chain across the door when she said goodbye to Mrs Prosser on the evening of 27th
November. The next morning, the security chain was still in place and Miss Taylor was dead in her bedroom. That would suggest that no one had had access to the house during that period. It is possible that Miss Taylor had admitted other visitors after Mrs Prosser's departure but, if she did, she must have been able to put the chain on the door after they left. It is possible that Miss Taylor felt ill and managed to find a way to summon a doctor. If she had done so, it is unlikely that it would have been Shipman, as he was not on duty that evening. It seems extremely unlikely that Shipman could have visited Miss Taylor after Mrs Prosser's departure.
I am quite satisfied that Shipman was not involved in Miss Taylor's death. The exact cause of her death is unknown but I am sure that it was a natural one.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001