The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The First Report
>
Alphabetical List of Cases
>
Sarah Ann Thomas
Introduction
Mrs Sarah Ann Thomas died at her home, 7 Ridgefoot, Todmorden on Sunday, 29th
December 1974 at the age of 86. She was a widow and lived alone. She was probably a patient of Dr Grieve, a partner of Shipman at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre. Shipman certified that the cause of Mrs Thomas' death was coronary thrombosis.
Mrs Thomas' death was one of the 22 for which the cause was certified by Shipman during his time in Todmorden. Following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's clinical audit in January 2001, the police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Joan Davies, Mrs Thomas' granddaughter.
There was no inquest at the time of Mrs Thomas' death but an inquest into her death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
Mrs Thomas' general practitioner records have not survived and there are no relevant surgery records. The only contemporaneous document available to the Inquiry is the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate').
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Davies remembers her grandmother as a fit and healthy woman. Around Christmas 1974, Mrs Thomas became unwell and her daughter, Mrs Betsy Platt, Mrs Davies' mother, thought that she might have suffered a stroke. Mrs Platt is no longer alive. Mrs Davies visited her grandmother and recalls that she was confined to bed.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Davies remembers that her mother and father came to her house on 29th
December to tell her that her grandmother had died. She cannot recall what was said about the cause of the death.
Mrs Davies says that her mother was present at the moment of her grandmother's death. This is confirmed by the death certificate. Mrs Platt did not express any concern to her daughter about the treatment her mother had received or the circumstances of her death. Although Mrs Thomas' death was sudden, it was not regarded as a surprise, because of her age.
Certification
Shipman must have completed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), on which he would have stated when he last saw Mrs Thomas alive. Unfortunately, this document and its counterfoil have not been found. As Mrs Thomas was buried, there are no cremation documents. They would have provided information about the circumstances of the death.
Conclusion
This death was investigated because Shipman certified the cause of death.
In the absence of the medical records or any evidence from those who cared for Mrs Thomas in the days before her death, it is not possible to reach any firm conclusion as to whether Shipman might have caused the death. In the absence of the MCCD or a cremation certificate, there is no evidence of when Shipman last visited Mrs Thomas.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001