The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Ann Tempest
Introduction
Mrs Mary Ann Tempest died at her home, 16 Major Street, Todmorden on Monday, 1st
September 1975 at the age of 70. She was registered as a patient with the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre, where Shipman practised. She was probably on his list. Shipman had been practising in Todmorden for about 18 months at the time of Mrs Tempest's death. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
Mrs Tempest's death was one of the 22 for which the cause was certified by Shipman during his time in Todmorden. Following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's report in January 2001, the police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Jean Gatt, Mrs Tempest's niece.
No inquest was held in 1975 but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Ms Myra Bairstow, a former district nurse, who was based at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre in 1975. Mrs Tempest's medical records have not survived but her cremation certificate has been found.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Tempest had lived alone following the death of her husband, Jack. She had a married daughter, Mrs Kathleen Norma Heap, who died in about 1996. For most of her life, Mrs Tempest was a regular church attender.
Mrs Tempest suffered from diabetes. At the time of her death she was awaiting an operation on her toe. She had recently had a cyst removed from her head.
Mrs Gatt has been unable to provide a detailed account of her aunt's health in the weeks before her death. However, she does recall that Mrs Tempest was very ill. Ms Bairstow remembers nursing Mrs Tempest before she died but does not recall the nature of her illness.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Gatt remembers visiting Mrs Tempest on the day of her death. Also present were Mrs Tempest's sister, known to Mrs Gatt as Auntie Lizzie, Mrs Annie Howarth (Mrs Gatt's mother) and Mrs Irene Sutcliffe (a member of the Pentecostal Church). Together they sang a hymn to Mrs Tempest and Mrs Sutcliffe read passages from the Bible to comfort her. It was clearly realised that Mrs Tempest's death was imminent. Mrs Gatt and Mrs Sutcliffe left the house at about 3pm leaving Mrs Howarth and 'Auntie Lizzie' there. Mrs Tempest died later that day and Mrs Gatt learned of her death the following morning.
Mrs Gatt did not know which doctor her aunt was registered with, although she does recall that she was registered at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre. She does not recall Shipman or any other doctor visiting her aunt and has no recollection of any family members expressing concerns about the death.
Although Mrs Sutcliffe has been traced, she does not remember Mrs Tempest or anything about the circumstances of her death.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Neither the certificate nor its counterfoil has survived. The copy of the entry in the register of death ('death certificate') shows that Shipman certified the cause of death as coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
Mrs Tempest was cremated. Mrs Heap made the application for cremation. She said that her mother had died at
'23.30'
on 1st
September. She said that Shipman was Mrs Tempest's ordinary medical attendant, although Dr John Grieve had attended her during her last illness.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He also said that Mrs Tempest had died at
'23.30'
on 1st
September 1975. He said he had been Mrs Tempest's ordinary medical attendant for a period of 18 months and had attended her during her last illness, also for 18 months. He said that he had last seen Mrs Tempest alive on 29th
August 1975, 72 hours before her death. He saw her body some 72 hours after the death, at which time he performed a complete examination. The mode of death was said to be syncope of 20 to 30 minutes' duration. When asked to what extent his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or those of others, Shipman wrote:
'Based on Dr Grieve (partner) Mrs Brown 15 Major Street'
. Mrs Dorothy Brown, a neighbour of Mrs Tempest, who was also said to have been present at the moment of death, has since died. On Form B Shipman said that a Mrs Hirst, Mrs Tempest's sister and Ms Bairstow had nursed Mrs Tempest.
Dr Stella Brown completed Form C of the cremation certificate. She questioned Mrs Brown, in her capacity as a person who had nursed Mrs Tempest during her last illness and had been present at the death. Having spoken to Mrs Brown, Dr Brown was satisfied that the cause of death, as stated by Shipman, was correct.
Conclusion
Although very little is known of the nature of Mrs Tempest's last illness, it is clear that she was very ill and required nursing care. Her death appears to have been expected.
There is no reason to suspect that Shipman visited Mrs Tempest on the day of her death or to doubt that he last saw her on 29th
August 1975, as recorded on Form B. From the fact that Shipman did not see Mrs Tempest (who seems to have been his patient) for three days before her death and did not examine her body for a further three days after the death, it would appear likely that Shipman had taken a week's holiday and that Dr Grieve was covering his patients in his absence.
In those circumstances, I am quite sure that Mrs Tempest's death was due to natural causes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001