The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Sarah Tideswell
Introduction
Mrs Sarah Tideswell died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Thursday, 30th
October 1980 at the age of 85. It is not known whether, or for how long, she had been a patient of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was senility.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed advertisements in a number of newspapers, publishing a list of cases in which the Inquiry had only very limited information as to the circumstances of the death and in which no next of kin could be traced. In response, Mr David John Cook, a local funeral director who was related to Mrs Tideswell, contacted the Inquiry and provided some helpful family background information.
The Inquiry has not taken any witness statements but has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), Shipman's visits book for 1980 and the admissions register and daily diary from Charnley House.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
Mr Cook says that Mrs Tideswell looked after him as a child and that he looked upon her as his aunt. His uncle, Mr John Rawson, was Mrs Tideswell's stepbrother. Mr Rawson took care of Mrs Tideswell after the death of her husband and visited her in Charnley House. Mr Rawson is now dead. Mr Cook says that he had never previously made any connection between Mrs Tideswell and Shipman.
Mrs Tideswell was admitted to Charnley House on 7th
September 1979, just over 13 months before she died. The Charnley House diary for the weeks leading up to her death reveals that she was very unwell. She was confined to bed, had developed bedsores and was unable to take any solid food.
On Tuesday, 28th
October 1980, Mrs Tideswell was seen by Shipman who said that nothing could be done for her. The afternoon report for that day records that Mrs Tideswell's breathing was rather shallow and her pupils were fixed. She was nursed on her stomach in the afternoon to relieve the pressure on her buttocks and heels. That evening, she was very poorly and deteriorated quite rapidly. She survived the following day. On the afternoon of 30th
October 1980, she was given a nourishing drink but she died at 7.15pm that evening. There is no evidence that Shipman saw her alive that day. It is recorded that a doctor came to certify the death. As will appear below, this was probably Shipman.
Mrs Tideswell's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for 28th
, 29th
or 30th
October 1980, but it appears from that book that Shipman visited Charnley House on 28th
October to visit another resident. It seems likely that he was asked to look at Mrs Tideswell while he was there.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been recovered. On that, Shipman said that the cause of death was senility. He said that he had last seen Mrs Tideswell alive on 29th
October. That was probably not correct. He had probably last seen her on 28th
October. He said that he had seen her body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Tideswell died of natural causes. It is clear that she was very unwell in the few weeks before her death. It would appear that she was declining gradually towards death. There is no evidence that Shipman gave her any treatment in the few days before she died or that he saw her alive on the day of the death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001