The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Caroline Mary Taylor
Introduction
Mrs Caroline Mary Taylor died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Sunday, 13th
May 1984 at the age of 84. She was registered as a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Christine Booth (Mrs Taylor's great-niece) and Mrs Judith Lees (a former care assistant at Charnley House). The Inquiry has also had access to the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary, Shipman's visits book for 1984 and the duty doctor transfer diary recovered from the Donneybrook Surgery. Mrs Taylor's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
For many years, Mrs Taylor lived with her husband in Denton. Mr Taylor died in January 1984. Although Mrs Taylor was physically quite well, her mental health was poor and it soon became apparent that she was unable to care for herself. Mrs Booth's father arranged for Mrs Taylor to be admitted to Charnley House. The Charnley House daily diary records that she was admitted on Friday, 13th
April 1984 and was noted to be unsteady on her feet.
It was the practice of Charnley House staff to make an entry in the daily diary about any resident who was unwell or when something arose during one shift which was to be brought to the attention of the staff on the following shift. Where the daily diary does not mention a patient, it can generally be inferred that the patient was reasonably well and was eating normally.
Mrs Taylor's name is not mentioned in the daily diary from the time of her admission until 30th
April 1984. She was then noted to be feeling unwell. The following day, she was complaining of back pain for which she was given analgesia. She was not eating well on 3rd
, 4th
or 5th
May. Her appetite then improved and she was apparently well until Saturday, 12th
May, the day before her death. The night report for 12th
May records that she had had a very bad night and remained in bed in the morning.
There is no record, either in the daily diary or in Shipman's visits book, to suggest that Shipman saw Mrs Taylor at all while she was at Charnley House.
The Day of the Death
The morning report in the daily diary for Sunday, 13th
May 1984 contains the following reference to Mrs Taylor:
'SAT UP IN CHAIR, DRINKING VERY LITTLE
SLEEPING MOST OF THE TIME NO COMPLAINTS, EATEN
SMALL AMOUNT OF LUNCH. BUSY MORNING. C. HOLLAND'
.
The afternoon report records:
'no tea eaten or drink
(
sic
)
Doctor sent for, breathing very shallow
Legs and hands very purple. No response
at all'
.
Mrs Taylor was plainly very ill. According to the evidence of Mrs Lees, as well as the generic evidence from Charnley House, it was the usual practice for a doctor's visit to be recorded in the daily diary. Mrs Lees says that it would be unusual to see a note that the doctor was sent for without it also being recorded that he or she attended. The request in respect of Mrs Taylor appears to have been made during the afternoon but there is no record that a doctor attended before Mrs Taylor died. According to the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer diary, Dr Napier was on out of hours duty on 13th
May. It appears that he transferred calls to the deputising service at 1pm. After that time, any call made to the Donneybrook Surgery would have been put through to the deputising service. That may explain why no one came to see Mrs Taylor before she died that day. There is no reason to suspect that Shipman was called out that day.
The final entry in the daily diary is contained within the night report and records:
'Mrs Taylor passed away at 11.30
letter for Dr Shipman. 5 rings for Mr Vickerman
under-taker was charles Rob & Son 224-1200'
.
Mrs Lees has said that she finds it unusual that a letter had been left for Shipman. It seems likely to me that a deputising doctor attended after the death, although the daily diary does not record this, and that that doctor left a letter for Shipman describing his or her findings.
Mrs Booth recalls that her father telephoned her on 14th
May 1984 to tell her that her great-aunt had died the night before. He told her that Mrs Taylor had 'just drifted away'. No mention was made of Shipman having visited Mrs Taylor.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. Shipman said that Mrs Taylor died of old age at Charnley House on 13th
May 1984. He said that he had last seen Mrs Taylor alive on 9th
May 1984. However, her name does not appear in his visits book for that day. Nor does it appear from the visits book that he visited any other resident of Charnley House that day. There is no reference to a visit by Shipman in the daily dairy for 9th
May. On the counterfoil, Shipman recorded that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 14th
May 1984, the day after Mrs Taylor died. It is likely that Shipman had not seen Mrs Taylor for some considerable time before her death but claimed that he had in order to avoid the trouble involved in a referral to the coroner.
Conclusion
I am quite sure that Mrs Taylor died of natural causes, although whether her death could properly have been attributed to old age seems rather doubtful. It does not appear from the daily diary that she had undergone any prolonged physical decline. Her final illness appears to have been quite brief. However, that does not mean to say that the death was not natural.
There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman saw Mrs Taylor at all in the weeks before her death. Rather, it appears that he claimed that he had done, so that he would appear qualified to certify the cause of her death. Shipman was often cavalier as regards his duties in respect of death certification and the fact that he told a lie on the MCCD counterfoil and probably on the certificate itself does not raise any suspicion that he might have killed Mrs Taylor.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001