The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Edna Mary Taylor
Introduction
Mrs Edna Mary Taylor died at Charlotte House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 27th
April 1993 at the age of 90. She had been a patient of Shipman since 1979 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of her death was cardiac arrest due to congestive heart failure.
On 1st
February 2000, following Shipman's conviction at Preston Crown Court, Mrs Taylor's daughter, Mrs Mary Fairclough, contacted the police from her home in Spain to inform them that Shipman had certified her mother's death, although the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') in fact records his name as
'H.F. Shipley'
. The police investigated Mrs Taylor's death and spoke to Mrs Ann McInerney who used to work as a care assistant at Charlotte House. Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Taylor but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs McInerney. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Taylor's medical records, the surgery appointments sheets and visits books for the relevant period, the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Taylor had been a resident at Charlotte House for many years. She had Alzheimer's disease. She also suffered from arthritis. Her sight and hearing were poor.
The last entry in the medical records before the entry recording Mrs Taylor's death is dated 22nd
April 1993. It is not easy to decipher but appears to suggest that Mrs Taylor had a chest infection for which Amoxil was prescribed. The note also recorded that Mrs Taylor was on Melleril, a sedative. It appears that on this occasion Mrs Taylor was not suffering from congestive heart failure.
The Day of Death
Mrs McInerney recalls the circumstances of Mrs Taylor's death. In the late afternoon, after having tea, Mrs Taylor collapsed in the lavatory. She was having difficulty in breathing and it was thought that she was having a heart attack. It appears that an ambulance was summoned and that Shipman was sent for. The surgery visits book contains the following entry:
'Edna Taylor Charlotte...breathing - emergency'
.
Mrs Taylor died before the ambulance arrived. The paramedics pronounced Mrs Taylor dead.
Mrs McInerney recalls that Shipman did not attend at Charlotte House that day in connection with Mrs Taylor's death. However, Shipman made an entry in the medical records which suggests that he did visit that day, although not until after Mrs Taylor had died. The entry reads:
'V
(
visit
)
Death 1740
1a
2
Cardiac Arrest
CHF
Senile Dementia'.
This entry would suggest that Shipman had attended at Charlotte House to certify the cause of death, which Shipman considered to be cardiac arrest due to congestive heart failure. He also noted that senile dementia had contributed to the death.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. Shipman recorded that Mrs Taylor had died on 27th
April 1993, at the age of 91. He stated that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis due to congestive heart failure. He said that he had last seen Mrs Taylor on 22nd
April 1993. He said he had examined the body after death. There would not be a post-mortem examination.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker examined the medical records and considered that the death was not suspicious.
Conclusion
The evidence suggests that Mrs Taylor collapsed in the late afternoon of 27th
April and died before either an ambulance or a doctor could attend. It is recorded that following her collapse she was having difficulty in breathing. This would be consistent with either a heart attack or an episode of acute left ventricular failure. Either event could have resulted in death.
There is strong evidence to suggest that Shipman was not at Charlotte House on the day of Mrs Taylor's death until after the death had occurred.
I am satisfied that this was a natural death and that Shipman was not unlawfully involved.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001