The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Winifred Amy Tuffin
Introduction
Mrs Winifred Amy Tuffin died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 7th
November 1978 at the age of 86. She was a patient of Shipman. Following a post-mortem examination without inquest, the South Manchester Coroner certified that the cause of her death was left ventricular failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Judith Glover, Mrs Tuffin's granddaughter. The Inquiry has also had access to the Charnley House daily diary for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also had access to the Report of Death to the Coroner, the Medical History in a Case of Sudden Death, the Report of Sudden Death prepared by the Greater Manchester Police, and the Post-Mortem Examination Report prepared by Dr A S Day of Ashton General Hospital. A report has been obtained from Professor Helen Whitwell. Mrs Tuffin's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
Mrs Glover recalls that her grandmother suffered from renal failure and had 'trouble with her heart'. The daily diary from Charnley House reveals that, in the fortnight leading up to her death, Mrs Tuffin was very poorly and confused. She was refusing to eat and she was exhibiting very disturbed behaviour. The daily diary records that Shipman saw her on 2nd
November 1978, found no physical illness and arranged for her to be seen by the geriatrician that day. The geriatrician said that Mrs Tuffin was deeply depressed and prescribed anti-depressant medication. He also made recommendations concerning her personal hygiene.
Mrs Glover last spoke to her grandmother on the night before Mrs Tuffin died. Mrs Glover remembers feeding her a small amount of jelly. Mrs Tuffin had become weaker in the days before she died and Mrs Glover thought that she had 'given up the will to live'.
There is no evidence in the daily diary to suggest that Shipman or any other doctor visited Charnley House on the day of Mrs Tuffin's death. The only entry for 7th
November 1978 relating to Mrs Tuffin says:
'Mrs Tuffin passed away at 4.00pm. Remaining residents comfortable'
.
Mrs Glover was at her parents' house on 7th
November 1978 when a member of staff from Charnley House telephoned to say that Mrs Tuffin was not expected to live much longer. The family went to Charnley House where they found Mrs Tuffin in bed apparently asleep. After 'quite some time', and while Mrs Glover was out of the room, Mrs Tuffin died. Mrs Glover thinks that she may have been told that a doctor had visited Mrs Tuffin in the 24 hour period before she died but she is unsure of this.
Mrs Tuffin's death seems to have been regarded as sudden and unexplained and was referred to the coroner, who ordered a post-mortem examination. The findings were that Mrs Tuffin had congested and oedematous lungs. There were moderate to severe grades of atheroma in the coronary vessels and aorta. There were some renal stones and an infection of the right kidney. The pathologist concluded that the cause of death was left ventricular failure, due to ischaemic heart disease. Renal stones and mild acute pyelonephritis had contributed to the death.
The Report of Death to the Coroner records that Mrs Tuffin had been seen by her general practitioner and by a specialist four times in the last month of her life. Neither doctor had been able to establish a diagnosis. The Medical History in a Case of Sudden Death form records that Mrs Tuffin was last seen half an hour before her death by Mrs Betty Brimble, a domestic help at the home. It also records that Mrs Tuffin was blind.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Helen Whitwell says that the history of Mrs Tuffin being unwell for some days prior to her death may well have been related to acute pyelonephritis (inflammation/infection of the kidney). There was also clear evidence of underlying heart disease with coronary arteriosclerosis and slight enlargement of the heart. Professor Whitwell says that the heart disease was a chronic condition but, together with the pyelonephritis and a degree of heart failure, this would be sufficient to account for the death. In Professor Whitwell's opinion, the cause of death, based on the information given in the post-mortem examination report, would be more appropriately described as ischaemic heart disease and acute pyelonephritis.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Tuffin died a natural death. She was clearly unwell in the days before her death, although the nature of her illness was not understood. Professor Whitwell's opinion is that the underlying heart disease with coronary arteriosclerosis and slight enlargement of the heart, together with pyelonephritis, would be sufficient to account for death in association with a degree of heart failure. I consider that the evidence is sufficient to explain the death satisfactorily.
There is no evidence that Shipman saw Mrs Tuffin in the few hours before her death. There is no reason to suspect that he played any part in her death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001