The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Florence Taylor
Introduction
Miss Florence Taylor died at her home, 8 Walker Close, Hyde on Saturday, 27th
June 1981 at the age of 93. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Miss Taylor's great-niece, Mrs Jean Stubbs, and has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1981, the cremation documentation and the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Miss Taylor's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Taylor lived alone in sheltered accommodation. Mrs Stubbs was close to her and regarded her more as a grandmother to her than a great-aunt. She says that Miss Taylor did not suffer from any serious health problems, although for many years she took medication for high blood pressure and there is a suggestion that she had suffered a deep vein thrombosis. It would appear that Miss Taylor consulted Shipman only infrequently. She remained quite active until the time of her death.
Mrs Stubbs was not aware that her great-aunt was ill during early June 1981. However, it appears that she might have been unwell on 23rd
June, as her name appears in Shipman's visits book for that day. As the medical records are unavailable, it is not possible to discover the reason for that visit. The visits book contains no further entries in Miss Taylor's name.
Mrs Stubbs recalls that at about 7pm to 7.30pm on the evening of Friday, 26th
June 1981, she received a telephone call from her mother, Mrs Florence Roberts, who was speaking from Miss Taylor's home. Mrs Roberts said that Miss Taylor was ill and that she intended to stay the night at Miss Taylor's house. Mrs Stubbs went to Miss Taylor's house with her husband and son. She recalls seeing Miss Taylor propped up in bed and recalls that, apart from having a heavy cold and a chesty cough, she did not look much different from usual. She was fully conscious and alert. She recalls Miss Taylor saying that she was a 'poorly lady'.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of Saturday, 27th
June 1981, Mrs Stubbs and her husband went to Miss Taylor's house to collect a shopping list from Mrs Roberts who had stayed overnight. Mrs Stubbs thinks that they arrived between 9.30am and 10am. Mrs Roberts told Mrs Stubbs that a doctor had visited Miss Taylor and had given her an injection to 'help her breathe'. She mentioned that Miss Taylor was in her bed 'dozing'. Mrs Stubbs' mother did not give the name of the doctor but Mrs Stubbs assumed that it was Shipman and that he had called that morning and not the previous evening.
Mrs Stubbs then went out to do some shopping. She does not think that she was away for long and thinks that she returned to Miss Taylor's house before 11am. Her mother then told her that Miss Taylor had died. Mrs Stubbs went into the bedroom and saw her great-aunt lying in bed. She looked very peaceful, almost as if she was asleep.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. The certificate itself has not survived but the counterfoil has been found. Shipman stated that Miss Taylor died on 27th
June 1981. The cause of death was bronchopneumonia. He also said that iron deficiency anaemia had contributed to the death. He stated that he had last seen Miss Taylor alive on 24th
June, three days before the death. It is possible that that was a genuine error and that he meant to say that he had seen her on 23rd
June, four days before the death, which would be consistent with the visits book. However, neither date is consistent with what he was to put on cremation Form B.
On Form B, Shipman recorded that death had occurred at 11.20am on 27th
June 1981. He said that he had been Miss Taylor's ordinary medical attendant for three and a half years. He stated that he had attended her during her last illness for a period of four days and that he had last seen her alive 18 hours before her death. That would suggest that he visited Miss Taylor between about 5pm and 6pm on the evening of Friday, 26th
June. The cause of death was as stated on the MCCD counterfoil. The mode of death was said to be a coma lasting 18 hours. It appears that Shipman originally wrote '12 hours' which would suggest that he had last seen her at 11.20pm the previous day. The answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were said to be based on his own observations. Shipman recorded that Miss Taylor had been nursed during her last illness by the matron of the elderly persons' houses at Walker Close. He did not mention Mrs Florence Roberts. He said that no one was present at the moment of death.
On the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the informant in relation to the death was said to be Mrs Florence Roberts who was also said to have been present at the moment of death. This is inconsistent with what Shipman said on Form B.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker examined the cremation documents and did not consider the death to be suspicious.
Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry, has provided a brief note with suggestions as to what drugs Shipman might have given Miss Taylor to help her breathe. He suggests two possibilities, aminophylline or salbutamol, both of which are administered by injection. Both would give rise to a slight risk of causing death due to a cardiac arrhythmia. However, death from such a cause would take place quickly, virtually during the injection as Dr John Grenville explained in his report on the death of Mrs Hannah Jones. Neither would carry any risk of causing or hastening death once the injection was over.
Conclusion
It is difficult to be sure about Miss Taylor's state of health in the absence of her medical records but her age, combined with her history of raised blood pressure, put her at increased risk of sudden death and made her vulnerable to a relatively rapid death resulting from bronchopneumonia. There is clear evidence that on 26th
June, she was laid up in bed with a chest infection. Her perception was that she was a 'poorly lady'. If there were no suggestion of a subsequent visit by Shipman, I would have no reason to suspect that her death resulted from anything other than the natural progression of a severe chest infection and bronchopneumonia.
Whilst none of the documents produced by Shipman suggest that he did visit Miss Taylor on the day of her death or on the previous day, Mrs Stubbs remembers being told that he did visit. Although she cannot be sure, the impression she formed when she spoke to her mother on the morning of Miss Taylor's death was that Shipman had visited at some time early that morning rather than on the previous evening.
Mrs Stubbs remembers that her mother told her that Miss Taylor was given an injection to help with her breathing. I think that the doctor referred to was Shipman, although it may be that he called later than Mrs Stubbs remembers. Whilst it might have been legitimate for Shipman to give some sort of injection to assist with Miss Taylor's breathing, I would be extremely suspicious that the injection in question had been of morphine or diamorphine if the death occurred shortly afterwards. I say that, not only because of what I know about Shipman's general method of killing, but also because had Miss Taylor died as a result of heart problems, induced by an injection of aminophylline or salbutamol, she would have died as the injection was being given or immediately afterwards, which is clearly not the case.
I am, therefore, suspicious about the close connection in time between the visit that Mrs Stubbs remembers and Miss Taylor's death. I think it unlikely that Shipman gave a lethal intravenous dose of morphine or diamorphine when he saw Miss Taylor because this would have resulted in death within a small number of minutes and that is not the impression that Mrs Stubbs was given by her mother. On the other hand, it is possible that Shipman gave a lethal intramuscular injection in which case the death might not take place until one hour after the administration of the injection. Even if Shipman had visited the previous evening, if the effect of any injection given during the course of that visit was to heavily sedate Miss Taylor, in effect to put her into a coma, then it could be that the effect of such sedation was to hasten her death by rendering her more vulnerable to the onset or progression of fatal bronchopneumonia.
I gain little comfort from what Shipman wrote on the MCCD counterfoil and on Form B of the cremation forms, which are, as I have pointed out, inconsistent. Although he does not suggest that he saw Miss Taylor on the day of her death, he does admit on the cremation forms that he last saw her alive 18 hours before her death and this is precisely the duration of the coma which he said represented the mode of her death. I am inclined to accept Mrs Stubbs' evidence that her great-aunt was conscious and alert the previous evening, evidence which is inconsistent with Shipman's assertion about the coma.
The circumstances of this case do not allow me to reach a positive conclusion that Shipman unlawfully killed Miss Taylor but I am, unfortunately, suspicious that he did.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001