The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Elizabeth Thwaites
Introduction
Mrs Elizabeth Thwaites died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Friday, 14th
April 1972 at the age of 74. She had been admitted to the hospital eight days earlier. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was congestive heart failure due to anaemia due to uraemia and a chronic duodenal ulcer. At the time of Mrs Thwaites’ death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Frances Mary Grayson, Mrs Thwaites’ only daughter. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Thwaites’ hospital records. Mrs Thwaites was buried and so there are no cremation forms. Professor Richard Baker has considered and commented upon the hospital records. No post-mortem examination was performed.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers.
Personal Background
Mrs Thwaites was a widow. At the time of her last admission to hospital, she had been living with Mrs Grayson and her husband for about ten years. She was quite inactive and never really went out of the house. Mrs Grayson also recalls that her mother took many different tablets and suffered problems with high blood pressure and water retention.
In about May 1971, Mrs Thwaites was admitted to PGI suffering from congestive cardiac failure, iron deficiency, anaemia and a urinary tract infection. She also had gastric problems. In June 1971, Mrs Thwaites was transferred to Headlands Hospital, which was the local geriatric hospital and an annexe of PGI. She remained there until the beginning of September 1971, when her condition had improved and she was discharged home to the care of her daughter. She continued to make good progress, and by December 1971, she was feeling well.
In-Patient Treatment
Mrs Thwaites was readmitted to PGI on 6th
April 1972. It appears from the admission note in the hospital records (which was made by Shipman) that Mrs Thwaites’ general practitioner had requested her admission because she had congestive heart failure, was anaemic and had melaena (i.e. had been passing blood in her stools). On examination, Shipman reported that Mrs Thwaites was breathless, had ankle oedema and looked anaemic. She had a poor appetite and was very thirsty. She had a heart murmur with a
‘thrill’
and rectal examination confirmed rectal bleeding. Shipman prescribed a diuretic and digoxin and organised blood and urine tests and a chest x-ray. On 10th
April, Dr Meikle, consultant physician, recorded that Mrs Thwaites’ condition had improved sufficiently for her to be able to sit out of bed. Test results found within the records confirm the presence of blood in the stools.
On 12th
April 1972, two days before Mrs Thwaites died, Shipman made four entries in her hospital records. In the first (untimed) note, probably made during the ward round, he recorded that Mrs Thwaites was
‘not very good today’
, and that she had crepitations in the lung bases and ankle oedema. At 9pm, he recorded that Mrs Thwaites was feeling poorly and that he thought that she might be in ventricular failure. He recorded that she improved somewhat after he gave an intravenous injection of 40mg frusemide, a diuretic that would be suitable treatment for ventricular failure. He then went on to record that, at 10pm, Mrs Thwaites was in a
‘collapsed state’
. He recorded that it was
‘very difficult to say what is happening’
. He wondered if the cause was a stroke and made a note that he would see her the next morning. However, the medical records contain no note of an attendance by Shipman or any other doctor on 13th
April.
The nursing notes for 12th
April confirm that Shipman saw Mrs Thwaites at 9.15pm. The next nursing note is dated 13th
April but may well have been made by the night staff at the end of their shift. It records that Mrs Thwaites was given 80mg Lasix (the proprietary name for frusemide), rather than 40mg as recorded in Shipman’s own note. Dr Aneez Esmail, Medical Advisor to the Inquiry, has told me that even if 80mg was given, it could not have contributed to the death. The nursing note then stated that Mrs Thwaites had collapsed unconscious and that her colour was very poor. She had gradually returned to consciousness but her speech was very slow. The provisional diagnosis (presumably made by Shipman) was of a cerebrovascular accident. The nursing note, made at the end of the day shift on 13th
April, records that Mrs Thwaites remained very ill; she was very vacant and slow to answer questions. However, there was no obvious hemiplegia or paralysis.
Mrs Grayson says that she visited her mother each evening for about half an hour. Mrs Grayson never spoke to medical or nursing staff about her mother. She does not recall noticing any marked deterioration in her mother’s condition although her mother was not very talkative. Mrs Grayson expected that her mother would return home in due course. She says that she recollects that her mother’s death came as a shock because she had not thought that the death was imminent.
The Day of the Death
The nursing notes that record Mrs Thwaites’ condition during the night of 13th
to 14th
April show that she remained very ill, she had slept for four periods, her speech was still very slow and she was incontinent of urine.
The medical records for 14th
April, the day of the death, contain an untimed entry, made by Shipman. This relates to a possible iron infusion to treat iron deficiency anaemia; a test dose appears to have been administered with no reaction. Shipman recorded Mrs Thwaites’ plantar reflexes, testing for a stroke, but otherwise made no record at all about her condition or any treatment other than the iron infusion.
The nursing note made at the end of the day shift records that Mrs Thwaites remained very ill and was given
‘all cares’
.
Mrs Grayson visited her mother during the evening and left shortly before 8pm. She recalls that her mother’s condition was the same as usual. The nursing staff did not warn her that her mother might be close to death.
The final note in the medical records was made by Shipman and appears to have been started at 9.45pm. It reads as follows:
‘Pt very poorly.
Creps + + bases
Hs - triple rhythm.
IV. lasix 40mg
0.25 mg digoxin IM
2230hr
pt died.’
According to this note, Shipman found Mrs Thwaites to be very poorly. There were crepitations at the base of both lungs. The heart was in triple rhythm. Both of these are signs of heart failure. He administered 40mg Lasix intravenously and 0.25mg digoxin intramuscularly. Digoxin would be appropriate treatment for Mrs Thwaites’ condition as described. I have explained its properties in
Chapter Four
. It can be fatal in overdose. The patient died at 10.30pm, according to the note, but it is not clear what time elapsed between the giving of the injections and the death.
After making some notes reflecting what he intended to certify as the causes of death, Shipman wrote at the foot of the note,
‘not reported to coroner’
. It is not easy to understand why he should have made this note, but, if Mrs Thwaites died immediately following the injections, a referral to the coroner would have been appropriate since the proximity of timing would have suggested that the death might not have been natural but might instead have resulted from the giving of the injections.
The nursing note relating to the death does not report that Shipman was called to see Mrs Thwaites or that he provided any treatment. It simply records that the patient died at 10.30pm and that the relatives were not present.
Medical
Evidence
Professor Baker is of the opinion that Mrs Thwaites was severely ill at the time of her admission to hospital. However, he observes that the precise cause for deterioration in her condition on the evening of 12th
April is uncertain and the only record of the terminal events is that made by Shipman. That makes it difficult for him to form a reliable view about the circumstances of death. On the one hand, it is quite possible that Mrs Thwaites died a natural death but, on the other hand, in circumstances where Shipman is apparently the only witness, no reliance at all can be placed on the account that he wrote.
Other Events
Shipman also certified the causes of death of Mrs Agnes Davidson and Mrs Alice Smith, both of whom died on Ward 1 on the evening of 14th
April. I am suspicious about Shipman’s involvement in both of their deaths.
Conclusion
Although Mrs Grayson’s recollection is that her mother’s condition had not changed markedly by the evening of 14th
April, the nursing notes suggest that she had deteriorated quite suddenly late in the evening of 12th
April. Precisely why is not clear. In any event, Mrs Thwaites did not die that night, although she never improved to her previous state.
On the evening of 14th
April, Shipman attended Mrs Thwaites but the nursing notes do not confirm that he was called to see her. That arouses in my mind the suspicion that he attended of his own volition and might have been alone with her at the time when he claimed to have administered the Lasix and digoxin. He was on the ward during the late evening, dealing with other patients. He might have done what he claims to have done, which would have been appropriate treatment and quite incapable of hastening Mrs Thwaites’ death. However, he might have done something quite different and have caused or hastened her death; for example, he might have given more digoxin than he claimed to have given or he might have given another drug entirely.
A further cause for suspicion is that Mrs Grayson was not advised that her mother was close to death. It was common for relatives to be warned if the end was near so that they could stay at the patient’s bedside. A yet further cause for suspicion arises because this death occurred in the late evening. A high proportion of the deaths certified by Shipman occurred between 6pm and midnight. Finally, Shipman noted in terms that the death was not reported to the coroner. I suspect that he made the note because the death followed immediately the giving of the injections. I suspect that he did not refer the death to the coroner because he did not want the facts to be investigated.
It seems to me that Mrs Thwaites was very poorly and had not long to live. Having said that, I entertain very strong suspicions that Shipman hastened her death.
I very much regret that I have had to raise these doubts so many years after the death and I am sorry for the distress this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI, once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001