The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Donald Taylor
Introduction
Mr Donald Taylor died on Ward 2, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Saturday, 5th
February 1972 at the age of 55. He had been admitted to PGI three weeks earlier. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was myocardial infarction due to ischaemic heart disease. Previous myocardial infarction was said to be a secondary cause of death. At the time of Mr Taylor’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Taylor’s widow, Mrs Ethel Hepworth, and Mr Taylor’s son, Mr Ken Taylor. Mr Taylor’s brother, Mr George Taylor, who was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’), has since died. Mr Taylor’s hospital records are no longer available. A statement was also taken from Mrs Anne Calverley (formerly Miss Anne Paley), who, at the time, was the senior nursing sister on Ward 2. Mr Taylor’s body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to the cremation Forms A, B, C and F. No post-mortem examination was performed.
Mrs Hepworth had no concerns or suspicions about Mr Taylor’s death but, now that she knows that Shipman certified the cause of the death and since she believed that Mr Taylor had seemed to be improving before he died, she has some understandable concern about the death. Mr Ken Taylor has never had any concerns or suspicions about his father’s death.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mr Taylor suffered a heart attack in 1963 when the family was living in Wales. He was admitted to hospital for a few weeks. He had no further heart trouble until 1968; in that year and in 1969, he had
‘a couple of twinges’
, which were not, according to Mrs Hepworth, heart attacks. By this time, the family was living in Pontefract. Mr Taylor was working as a salesman. He was a heavy smoker and was not particularly active. However, he would tend his garden and went dancing with his wife every week. His health remained satisfactory until he was admitted to PGI in early 1972.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
Three weeks before he died, Mr Taylor suffered a heart attack at home. An ambulance was called and Mrs Hepworth accompanied her husband in the ambulance to PGI. Mr Taylor was being given oxygen through an oxygen mask and was quite agitated. He was admitted to the coronary care unit on Ward 2 and was attached to monitors and an intravenous drip. He was obviously unwell; his colour was poor and he was sedated. However, his condition gradually improved. He was moved out of the coronary care unit onto the ward. Mrs Hepworth visited him each afternoon and evening. Other members of the family and friends also visited him. He was able to sit up and talk to them. Mrs Hepworth never spoke to any of the doctors but she would see them walking around the ward.
Until two days before his death, the family believed that Mr Taylor would soon be discharged, although they had not been told this in terms. On the afternoon of Thursday, 3rd
February, Mr Taylor was moved back into the coronary care unit. His condition seemed to be as bad as when he had first been admitted. A nurse confirmed to Mrs Hepworth that Mr Taylor was poorly. His condition was no better the next day. Mr Ken Taylor visited with his mother on the evening of Friday, 4th
February, and recollects that his father was very grey. By this time, Mr Taylor was in his own room; patients tended to be moved into such a side room or cubicle when they became seriously ill or when death was thought to be imminent.
The Day of the Death
At about 2am on the morning of Saturday, 5th
February Mrs Hepworth received a telephone call from a nurse at PGI who said words to the effect
‘your husband is deteriorating and we would like you to come’
. She immediately took a taxi to the hospital, accompanied by a friend. They arrived at the hospital between about 2.30am and 3am. On arrival at the hospital, Mrs Hepworth tried to see her husband but she was asked to stay in a side room. She could hear alarms sounding and thought that the situation must be very serious. She believes that she waited for about four hours before a member of the hospital staff informed her that her husband had died. She thinks that this would have been at about 7am. She was shocked when she was told that Mr Taylor had died; she had not expected the death but, until recently, she had never harboured any concern about the treatment he had received.
Certification
Shipman completed cremation Form B. He stated that the death occurred at 6.50am and that he had attended Mr Taylor during his last illness for three weeks. He said that he last saw Mr Taylor alive
‘5/2/72 up to death’
. This would suggest that he attended to Mr Taylor shortly before his death, which is consistent with Mrs Hepworth’s recollection. He said that he saw the body at the time of death and ten minutes afterwards; he said that he made a complete examination of it. The mode of death was said to be
‘Asystole of heart’
and he said that there had been
‘20 minutes resuscitation’
; this information was said to be based on his own observations. He said that
‘Sister Palley
(
sic
)
’
nursed Mr Taylor in his last illness. Mrs Calverley has no recollection of Mr Taylor. Shipman said that he was present at the moment of death with
‘Night staff’
. The cause of death was recorded as myocardial infarction due to ischaemic heart disease. Previous myocardial infarction was said to have contributed to the death. Having seen Mr Taylor’s cremation forms, Mrs Hepworth said that the information contained in them appeared to be correct. Indeed, Form A, which she signed, recorded the time of death as 6.50am.
Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain completed Form C. He recorded that he had seen and questioned Shipman and also that he had seen and questioned the nursing staff on Ward 2. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Conclusion
Although there are no hospital records available to the Inquiry, it seems quite clear that Mr Taylor was suffering from ischaemic heart disease and was admitted to hospital after suffering a heart attack. It is also clear from the family’s evidence that he improved for a while and then suffered another coronary episode. Thereafter, he remained poorly and he must have been at severe risk of suffering a further, fatal, heart attack. Mrs Hepworth was called to the hospital in the early hours of the morning. She believed that her husband had indeed had a further attack. She could hear sounds suggesting that a team was attempting to save her husband’s life. Then she was told that he had died. Although Shipman was involved in her husband’s treatment, there is no suggestion that he was alone with Mr Taylor. Also, the cause of death given by Shipman is consistent with the information available to the family. It appears to me that this death was entirely natural. I do not think Mr Taylor’s family need have any cause for concern.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001