The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
William Turner
Introduction
Mr William Turner died on Ward 2, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Monday, 6th
March 1972 at the age of 52. He had been admitted to the hospital in the early hours of the previous day. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was myocardial infarction, due to ischaemic heart disease. Angina was said to be a contributory cause. At the time of the death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
Mr Turner’s son, Mr Allan Turner, and his two daughters, Mrs Mary Dawson and Mrs Freda Gawthorpe, have all provided statements to the Inquiry. A statement has also been taken from Mrs Jennifer Bratley (formerly Miss Jennifer Buckley), who was a day sister on the ward at the time and made the last entry in Mr Turner’s nursing records. The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Turner’s hospital records and cremation Forms A, B, C and F. Professor Richard Baker has considered and commented on the available documents. There was no post-mortem examination.
Although the family had not previously had any concerns about the circumstances of Mr Turner’s death, the fact that they now know that Shipman certified the cause of death has understandably caused them to become concerned.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
At the time of his death, Mr Turner had been employed for many years as a foreman in a brickworks. The hospital records available to the Inquiry show that he attended PGI in 1970 and was diagnosed as suffering from angina. His children were aware of that diagnosis and knew that he took medication for it. Their evidence suggests that there was no visible deterioration in their father’s health in the last year or so of his life, although, when out walking, he would occasionally have to stop to rest.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
According to his family, Mr Turner suddenly fell ill in the early hours of Sunday, 5th
March 1972. An ambulance was called and Mr Turner was taken to hospital. That afternoon, his daughters visited him. They remember that he looked pale and said that his feet were cold. He was on a heart monitor. Otherwise, he appeared well. The daughters did not speak to a doctor or nurse about their father.
The admission note in the medical records was made by Shipman. It is a detailed record. It confirms the history given to the Inquiry by the family. Mr Turner had awoken with chest pain. His general practitioner had been called out and had arranged his admission to hospital. According to Professor Baker, the findings on examination supported a diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction in a patient with known coronary heart disease. Initial treatment following admission involved the administration of diuretics, intravenous lignocaine and heparin (an anticoagulant). Shipman arranged various investigations.
A second entry, made on 5th
March by a different doctor, suggested that the probable course of events had been the gradual development of a coronary occlusion leading to a myocardial infarction.
The nursing notes for 5th
March show that Mr Turner was breathless on admission but, after initial treatment had been given, he was then described as
‘more settled’
. Later in the day, it was said that he had had a
‘fair day’
. He was on a monitor and his heart was in sinus rhythm. That is normal. His treatment was being continued. He was not experiencing chest pain.
The Day of the Death
The nursing note for the night of 5th
to 6th
March records that Mr Turner continued as before. He had not
‘complained unduly’
. The medical records contain an entry dated 6th
March providing the result of an electrocardiogram, which is very difficult to decipher.
Entries in both the medical and nursing records show that Mr Turner suffered a cardiac arrest at 2.35pm on 6th
March. It appears that the heart monitor sounded and an alert went out for the ‘crash’ team to carry out resuscitation.
The relevant medical note was made by Shipman and reads as follows:
‘1435hr - crashed
- Fibrillation immediately D.C. shock x 2
no effect
A/way in ECM.
100ml HCO3 drip set up
1450 spontaneous breathing
H.R. 30/- 5mins - ECM.
1500hr
no HR.
No spontaneous breathing
(
time, probably 15.10, crossed out
)
1505 pt dead
H F Shipman
(
Signed
)
D.C. signed.
1) A) 1) myocardial infarction
2) I.H.D.
b) Angina
H F Shipman
(
Signed
)
’
.
This note would suggest that, at 2.35pm, Mr Turner collapsed and immediate attempts were made at resuscitation. He was noted to be in atrial fibrillation. Cardioversion (electric shock treatment) was attempted, extracardiac massage was started and a bicarbonate infusion was given. All these steps would be appropriate treatment in the circumstances. Although there appears to have been some initial response, indicated by the return of a heart rhythm, this was a weak response with only 30 beats per minute. The heart is then recorded to have stopped again at 3pm with the absence of any spontaneous breathing. At 3.05pm, Shipman confirmed that Mr Turner was dead.
The nursing records written by Mrs Bratley confirm the story. Although she has no recollection of Mr Turner’s death, she says that she is
‘more or less certain’
that she would have been present when Mr Turner went into cardiac arrest and died. She says that the certified cause of death is consistent with the immediate medical history. Her signed record reads:
‘2.35pm - ARREST. - Defibrillated + intubated
unsuccessfully DIED 3-15pm Dr. Shipman
certified. Relatives informed.
Drugs used (see notes)’
.
The surviving records are incomplete; the drugs chart is missing.
Medical Evidence
According to Professor Baker, Mr Turner’s treatment after admission was reasonable. The use of intravenous lignocaine suggests that Mr Turner had been found to have what are known as ventricular extrasystoles, which indicate increased risk of ventricular fibrillation. The resuscitation, according to Professor Baker, appears to have been reasonable and the return of some heart rhythm proving only temporary is not unusual in these circumstances. According to Professor Baker, the clinical history of acute myocardial infarction followed after an interval by collapse and death is not unusual.
Certification
Shipman certified the cause of death on 6th
March. On 8th
March, Shipman completed cremation Form B. He recorded that Mr Turner died at 3.05pm and that he had attended him during his last illness for 36 hours, both of which assertions were broadly correct. I attach no importance to the discrepancy between his note of the time of death and that in the nursing record. He said that he had seen the body five minutes after death and made a complete examination of it. He said that the immediate cause of death was myocardial infarction, which he said was due to ischaemic heart disease; angina had contributed to the death. He gave the mode of death as cardiac arrest of minutes’ duration. He had previously written
‘seconds’
but crossed it out and wrote
‘minutes’
. He said that Sister Metcalfe (now Mrs Elaine Moss, at that time a sister on Ward 2) had nursed Mr Turner during his last illness but made no mention of Mrs Bratley. In response to the question,
‘Who were the persons (if any) present at the moment of death?’
Shipman wrote
‘self’
and again did not mention Mrs Bratley.
Professor Baker observed that it was a cause for suspicion that Shipman should suggest that he was the only person present at the death. It would be highly likely that at least one other person would have helped in the resuscitation and that that person would have stayed until it was clear that Mr Turner had died. Mrs Bratley believes that she would have been present during the resuscitation, although she does not have any specific recollection of the death.
Cremation Form C was completed by Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain, who said that he had seen and questioned the nursing staff on Ward 2 at PGI. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Conclusion
The course of Mr Turner’s final illness and death is well chronicled in the medical and nursing notes. Although any record made by Shipman must be viewed with caution, the nursing notes in this case, made independently of him, paint a similar picture to that painted by him. It is clear that Mr Turner had heart disease and suffered a myocardial infarction shortly before his admission to hospital. He was given appropriate treatment. However, he was at severe risk of suffering another, possibly fatal, cardiac episode. It appears from the medical and nursing records that this is what happened at 2.35pm on 6th
March. It also appears that the treatment given following the arrest was appropriate. It is likely that Mr Turner suffered a cardiac arrest, was given appropriate treatment but died shortly afterwards, from completely natural causes.
The only reason why Professor Baker expressed any concern about this death was that Shipman suggested that he was the only person present at the time of Mr Turner’s death. As I have explained in
Chapter Seven
, however, I am satisfied that there were several occasions when Shipman suggested that he alone was present at the moment of death when that was not the case. In this case, if by
‘the moment of death’
, Shipman meant the end of the attempt to resuscitate, when it was clear that Mr Turner was indeed dead, it is hard to see how Shipman could have been alone. At least one nurse would have been present and possibly another doctor. If, on the other hand, Shipman took the view that Mr Turner was dead before the resuscitation attempts began, it is possible that he was alone with him at that time. However, Shipman gave the time of death as 3.05pm, at the end of the attempts at resuscitation. How Shipman could ever have come to write that the duration of death was
‘seconds’
is hard to imagine, when the attempts at resuscitation had lasted nearly 30 minutes.
I cannot completely rule out the possibility that Shipman was alone with Mr Turner at about 2.35pm, did something which caused Mr Turner to go into cardiac arrest and then took part in the attempts to resuscitate. However, this is speculation and my view is that Mr Turner very probably died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001