The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Margaret Thompson
Introduction
Mrs Margaret Thompson died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Tuesday, 2nd
March 1971 at the age of 67. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was myocardial infarction. Other morbid conditions said by him to have contributed to the death, although not to be related to the immediate cause, were cerebrovascular accident, diabetes mellitus and chronic nephritis. At the time of Mrs Thompson’s death, Shipman was a house officer in medicine.
Mrs Thompson’s husband, Mr Lancelot Thompson, was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’). He has since died. Mr William Thompson, Mrs Thompson’s son, has been contacted by the Inquiry but chose not to provide a written statement or other evidence. Mrs Kathleen Naylor has provided a witness statement to the Inquiry. She was the senior nursing sister on Ward 1 at the time of Mrs Thompson’s death. Mrs Thompson’s medical records are no longer available. Her body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. No post-mortem examination was performed.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
The death certificate reveals that Mr Lancelot Thompson was a retired glass worker. He and his wife were living in Knottingley at the time of her death.
Certification
Shipman completed cremation Form B. He recorded that Mrs Thompson died at 1.05pm on 2nd
March 1971. He said that he had attended her during her last illness for four weeks. He said that he had last seen her alive on the day of her death. He said that he had seen and examined her body five minutes after the death. He recorded the same causes of death as he certified for the purposes of the registration of the death. He said that the mode of death was coma lasting ten minutes. This was, he said, based on his own observations. He said that the deceased was nursed during her last illness by Sister Naylor. In answer to the question as to who were the persons (if any) present at the moment of death, he recorded
‘self’
.
Mrs Naylor has no recollection of the death of Mrs Thompson. It may be that Shipman named Sister Naylor on Form B as she was the person in charge of the nursing staff on Ward 1, rather than to suggest that she was directly responsible for the care provided to Mrs Thompson.
Form C was completed by Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain. Dr Hasnain said that he had seen and questioned Shipman and the nursing staff on Ward 1 at PGI. He said that he had not seen or questioned any of Mrs Thompson’s relatives. He said that he was satisfied that the cause of death was myocardial infarction. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Conclusion
It is not possible to be confident about any of the facts in this case, because most of them are provided in documents of which Shipman was the author. It seems probable, however, that Mrs Thompson had been in PGI for about four weeks before she died, having suffered a stroke. She was probably diabetic and suffering from long-term kidney problems.
I do not know whether Mrs Thompson was nursed in one of the main areas of the ward, or whether she was admitted to, or at some later stage transferred to, one of the cubicles which were used to accommodate patients who were seriously ill or whose death was imminent.
I do not know whether Mrs Thompson was seriously ill shortly before she died or whether her death was expected. It is entirely possible, even likely, that her death was the result of the natural progression of her illness. However, some features of the information provided on Form B give rise to concern that Shipman might have been involved in the death.
Shipman claimed that he was present at the death and implied that he had been present at the bedside shortly before the death occurred. He said that he knew from his own observation that Mrs Thompson had been in a coma for ten minutes before she died. He implied that he was alone with her at the moment of death although, as I have explained in
Chapter Seven
, it does not necessarily follow that he was. Presence alone at the death of a patient is a most unusual occurrence for a doctor. In the ordinary course of events, it is most unlikely that it should have been a doctor, rather than a nurse, who first observed that Mrs Thompson had deteriorated and was unconscious. The usual course would be for a nurse to notice any change in the patient’s condition and to summon a doctor if necessary. Usually, the nurse would then stay at the bedside while the doctor examined the patient and gave or ordered any necessary treatment. It would be unusual for the doctor to remain after that time and most unusual for the doctor to remain at the bedside in the absence of a nurse. Yet this is what Shipman implied had happened in this case.
There might be a perfectly innocent explanation for what Shipman wrote on Form B. It is possible that, although such an occurrence would be unusual for most doctors, Shipman was indeed present before, during and after the death and was administering such appropriate treatment as he could. I cannot say.
I also have some concern about the cause of death certified by Shipman. He ascribed the death to a myocardial infarction (heart attack) and yet did not state that there was any underlying heart disease. A heart attack often results in a rapid death, lasting only a few minutes. Professor Richard Baker reported that Shipman certified more deaths than other doctors as being due to cardiac or cerebrovascular causes and often stated that the duration of the death was much shorter than other doctors usually did. These were also common features of the cremation certificates of patients he killed in later years.
The degree of suspicion that I entertain is reduced to some extent because, at the time, Shipman was still very inexperienced. He was not yet fully qualified and had worked on the medical wards for only just over a month. I am doubtful that he would have had the confidence to kill so soon after his arrival. That said, in the light of Shipman’s subsequent history, the unusual pattern of entries on Form B must give rise to some suspicion that he caused or hastened Mrs Thompson’s death.
I very much regret that I have had to raise these doubts so many years after the death and I am sorry for the distress this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI, once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001