The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The First Report
>
Alphabetical List of Cases
>
Stanley Uttley
Introduction
Mr Stanley Uttley died at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre, Todmorden on Friday, 2nd
August 1974 at the age of 58. According to the Report of Death prepared shortly after his death by the West Yorkshire Metropolitan Police, Mr Uttley was registered as a patient with Shipman. At the time of Mr Uttley's death, Shipman had been practising from the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre in Todmorden for about five months. Following a post-mortem examination without inquest on 2nd
August 1974, the Coroner for the Metropolitan District of Calderdale certified that the cause of Mr Uttley's death was myocardial infarction.
Following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's clinical audit in 2001, the West Yorkshire Police investigated Mr Uttley's death together with a number of other cases in which the death had been referred to the coroner. No living relatives were traced and no witness statements were taken.
The Inquiry has had access to the Report of Death referred to above and the post-mortem report prepared by Dr B Boczarow. The Inquiry has not taken any witness statements and Mr Uttley's medical records have not survived. There are no relevant surgery records.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
According to the Report of Death, Mr Uttley had lived in Todmorden all his life. He was married and lived with his wife, Mrs Agnes Irene Uttley, at the Hollins Inn, Hollins Road, Walsden, Todmorden. There is no general description of his health beyond the fact that he was overweight.
According to the Report of Death, Shipman visited Mr Uttley on Sunday, 28th
July and diagnosed him as suffering from chronic bronchitis, emphysema, ischaemic heart disease and left ventricular failure. Shipman apparently suspected that Mr Uttley also suffered from a liver complaint and intended to send Mr Uttley for x-rays. A blood sample was taken on Thursday, 1st
August but the result was not available at the time of the death. Shipman apparently considered that Mr Uttley had a life expectancy of about two years.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Uttley last saw her husband alive at about 10am on Friday, 2nd
August when he left home alone to drive into Todmorden. At about midday, he collapsed in the market hall and two passing nurses gave him cardiac massage. An ambulance arrived at 12.07pm and took Mr Uttley to the Abraham Ormerod Medical Practice where Dr Bunn continued to administer cardiac massage. Despite Dr Bunn's efforts, Mr Uttley died, and Dr Bunn pronounced him dead at 12.20pm.
The Post-Mortem Report
Dr Boczarow performed a post-mortem examination on Mr Uttley's body on 2nd
August 1974. The heart was found to be enlarged and the left ventricular wall was thickened. The coronary arteries showed severe atherosclerosis and a recent red and yellow area of infarction was noted at the junction of the left posterior ventricular wall and the posterior septum. The distal part of the right circumflex coronary artery was occluded by a dry red thrombus.
Following the post-mortem examination, Dr Boczarow expressed the view that the cause of death was myocardial infarction due to coronary heart disease.
Conclusion
The circumstances of this death are well documented in the contemporaneous records. The post-mortem findings were entirely consistent with a death from myocardial infarction or heart attack. It appears that Shipman had already discovered that Mr Uttley has ischaemic heart disease.
Shipman last saw Mr Uttley on the day before he died, when he took a blood sample. After that, Mr Uttley appeared to be well until he collapsed suddenly in the market hall. There can be no possible suspicion that Shipman played any part in this death.
I am quite sure that Mr Uttley died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001