The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Lucy Virgin
Introduction
Mrs Lucy Virgin died at her home, 24 Carter Place, Newton, Hyde on Wednesday, 1st
March 1995 at the age of 70. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis caused by ischaemic heart disease.
In October 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mrs Virgin's niece, Mrs Rose Ann Smith, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of Mrs Virgin's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Smith and Mr Steven Booth, one of Mrs Smith's work colleagues.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Virgin but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has obtained statements from Mrs Smith and Mr Booth, both of whom gave oral evidence at a hearing on 9th
October 2001. There is also a statement from Mr Neil David Harrop, one of the paramedics who attended after Mrs Virgin's death, dealing with this and other cases. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Virgin's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
Personal Background
Mrs Virgin was separated from her husband and lived alone in a first floor flat. Mrs Smith saw her aunt several times a week. She knew that Shipman was Mrs Virgin's general practitioner and that Mrs Virgin 'adored' him. She would not go to live with her sister in Blackpool because she thought she would never find another doctor like him. Although not his patient, Mrs Smith knew Shipman, as she worked at the Nu-Pharm Chemist. She used to see Shipman when she collected prescriptions from his surgery as part of the firm's delivery service.
Mrs Virgin's medical records reveal that she had a cancerous tumour of the bladder in 1983. It did not spread outside the bladder and was monitored by repeated cystoscopies. In 1991, she was diagnosed as suffering from early chronic lymphocytic leukaemia and this condition was monitored at hospital. It never caused any symptoms and never required treatment.
Mrs Virgin also suffered from varicose eczema and ulceration of her legs, which required regular dressings when they flared up. She had suffered from a duodenal ulcer and some ear problems in the past and had undergone surgery for both these conditions. In the last few years of her life, she had recurrent chest infections.
It is significant that the records disclose no history of cardiac problems.
Mrs Virgin was generally active and did all her own shopping and housework. Up to the time of her death, she worked as a part-time cleaner. She walked her dog several times a day.
The Events of the Weeks Leading up to Death
A picture of Mrs Virgin's health immediately prior to her death can be gained from the computerised records. In January 1995, her leg ulcers had flared up and required dressing. In early February, she had blood tests and renal function tests. The latter were normal but she was found to be low in iron and received an appropriate prescription.
On 14th
February 1995, there is an entry in the surgery visits book:
'Too ill to keep her app.
(
appointment
)
please will you visit'
.
On the same date, there is a computerised record showing that Shipman visited her and Mrs Virgin gave a history of viral illness, which was described as
'local flu'
.
On the following day, 15th
February, the visits book records:
'FOOT SWOLLEN + FUNNY COLOUR'
.
It seems that Shipman visited again and noted the presence of a chronic skin ulcer, which had become infected. An antibiotic was prescribed.
The visits book for 22nd
February 1995 records an intention to revisit and there is a computerised note recording that Mrs Virgin had
'Acute bronchitis'
which was
'better'
. A repeat prescription, possibly of antibiotic, was given and a further visit was planned for a week hence. The intention to revisit on 1st
March is recorded in the visits book.
Mrs Smith was aware that her aunt's leg ulceration had flared up shortly prior to her death and that she had been diagnosed by Shipman as having a chest infection and had been advised not to go out of the house. However, she says that her aunt did not appear unwell to her and continued to walk her dog, although not going out otherwise. Mrs Smith visited her aunt most days and took any shopping which she needed.
Mrs Smith last saw her aunt the night before she died when she called as usual after work. Mrs Virgin had had her evening meal and washed up. Mrs Smith had no particular concerns about her.
On the day before Mrs Virgin's death, Shipman took possession of ten 100mg ampoules of diamorphine. He presented a prescription drawn in the name of Mr Frank Crompton, a patient who had no need of such drugs and who did not receive them. I have found that Shipman obtained those drugs for his own purposes. I am satisfied that he was replenishing his stock for use on other patients.
The Day of the Death
Shipman visited Mrs Virgin as arranged on 1st
March and the computerised record of that visit reads:
'Examn. of respiratory system
a/e = basal creps hs I II
O/E - skin ulcer
r ok l nearly ok see 7/7/'
.
There is also a manuscript note that is difficult to decipher but appears to read:
'Chest tight A/E = BS
amp
(
ampicillin, an antibiotic
)
6 hourly
further Antibiotics Ceporex
Leg ulcers healing very nicely'
.
I interpret these two entries to suggest that Shipman examined Mrs Virgin's respiratory system and found the air entry equal on both sides. He heard basal crepitations, which suggested the presence of a chest infection. The heart sounds were normal. He prescribed a further course of antibiotic. The leg ulcers were improving. The right leg had healed and the left was much better.
At about noon on 1st
March, Mrs Virgin telephoned Mrs Smith at work to say that Shipman had been and prescribed more antibiotics. Mrs Smith telephoned her colleague, Mr Steven Booth, whose job it was to collect and deliver prescriptions, and asked him to collect her aunt's prescription so that the medication could be delivered that afternoon. Mr Booth duly called at the flat (he puts the time of his visit at about 12.30pm-12.45pm) and saw Mrs Virgin. She was fully dressed and appeared much as usual, although Mr Booth believes that she said words to the effect that she felt 'a bit rough'. Mr Booth collected the prescription and handed it in when he arrived at the pharmacy. He recalls that Mrs Virgin was very security conscious and he heard her lock the door with bolt and chain as he left.
In the early afternoon, Mrs Smith visited Shipman's surgery to collect prescriptions and saw Shipman in reception. He asked her whether she had seen her aunt that day and, when she asked why, he gave no reason. She was slightly perturbed and, on returning to the pharmacy at about 2.45pm, telephoned her aunt. She suspected that her aunt was poorly. There was no reply. She tried on several occasions but without success.
At about 4pm, Mr Booth returned to Mrs Virgin's flat with her medication. There was no response to his knock but he heard Mrs Virgin's dog barking so he realised that she must be at home. He attempted to open the front door and, to his surprise, found it unlocked. He went into the sitting room and found Mrs Virgin in a chair, fully dressed. She looked as if she was asleep.
Mr Booth tried to rouse her, then felt for a pulse in the wrist and neck. He checked to see if she was breathing. He thought she was dead. He went to fetch a neighbour, who has since died, and she confirmed his view. Mr Booth then summoned an ambulance. His call was timed at 4.07pm. He then telephoned Mrs Smith who came to her aunt's flat immediately. The paramedics confirmed that Mrs Virgin was dead. Mrs Smith saw that her aunt was sitting upright on her chair, with her head slightly forward. Her spectacles had slipped towards the end of her nose. Her newspaper was partly on her knee and part of it had slipped to the floor. Mrs Smith found that her aunt had partly prepared the food she had intended to eat that evening.
Mrs Smith telephoned Shipman's surgery and he arrived shortly afterwards. Rather curiously, he asked Mrs Smith what she thought he should put on the death certificate. He told Mrs Smith that there would be no need for a post-mortem examination and that she could collect the death certificate from the surgery the following day.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) records the cause of death as coronary thrombosis with an interval of
'minutes'
between onset and death, that condition being caused in turn by ischaemic heart disease which is said to have been present for 11 years before death. The medical records do not confirm that Mrs Virgin suffered from ischaemic heart disease. Shipman also stated that chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, which had been present for four years, had contributed to the death. Dr Grenville says that it could not have done.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that the death occurred at
'About 14.30'
and that he had attended Mrs Virgin for two hours during her last illness. What the last illness was supposed to be is not clear. He said he had last seen Mrs Virgin alive about two hours before death, which on his timings would have been at about 12.30pm. He also stated that he saw her about two hours after death and carried out a complete external examination. The cause of death was given as on the MCCD and the mode of death was said to be collapse lasting only seconds. He claimed that his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and on statements made by
'attending ambulance personnel'
. He said that no one was present at the moment of death.
There are several reasons why these entries give rise to suspicion that Shipman might have been involved in the death. First, unless Shipman was present at the time of death, there is no way in which he could have made an accurate estimate of the time of death. Any reasonable doctor would have said that the death had occurred at some unknown time between 12.30pm (when Shipman himself claimed to have seen Mrs Virgin alive) and 4pm, when she was found dead. Shipman often claimed that he knew the time of a death that had taken place while no one was present. In my view, he often did so in an attempt to distance himself from the death. Second, Shipman claimed that he had attended Mrs Virgin for two hours during her last illness. The last illness is supposed to be the condition leading to the death. In the medical record of the consultation earlier that day, Shipman made no reference to any heart condition. I consider that the entry relating to the 'last illness' was an attempt to make it appear that Mrs Virgin had been showing some signs of a cardiac condition which enabled him to diagnose the cause of death. Third, Shipman claimed that he had gained some information about the cause or mode of death from the paramedics. As they arrived some time after the discovery of the body, it is hard to see what they could have told Shipman so as to enable him to infer that the mode of death had been a collapse lasting only seconds. They probably told him how they found Mrs Virgin, which he had in any case seen for himself. She had been found sitting in her chair and there was nothing to suggest a collapse. I consider that this was an attempt to make it appear that Mrs Virgin had been found in a position consistent with death following coronary thrombosis. The truth was that she had not.
Shipman's Movements
There is clear evidence that Mrs Virgin was alive and well after Shipman had visited her at about noon on 1st
March. If Shipman killed Mrs Virgin, he must have visited her again, at some time after Mr Booth had collected her prescription. There is no direct evidence of a second visit by Shipman.
On the day of Mrs Virgin's death, the appointments sheet shows that Shipman had his usual morning surgery, followed by open surgery which was due to start at 10.15am. Thirteen patients attended the open surgery and it seems likely that this would have taken until at least 11.45am. Shipman would usually do some paperwork at that stage, before going out on his visits. However, it is possible that he visited Mrs Virgin at about noon or soon afterwards. He had a vaccinations clinic at 2pm, his last appointment being at 2.15pm since the names of the last two patients had been deleted. He would have been free to leave to resume his visits at about 2.20pm or 2.30pm at the latest. Afternoon surgery began, as usual, at 4pm. The visits book shows seven visits to be made, including that to Mrs Virgin. The addresses of the patients to be visited are plotted on the map of Hyde. The various addresses are quite close to each other and not far from the surgery. It would have been feasible for Shipman to visit Mrs Virgin again.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker regarded the death as highly suspicious on the basis of his consideration of both the cremation certificate and the medical records.
Dr Grenville noted that the symptoms recorded by Shipman on 1st
March were of a mild chest infection. Shipman could not have honestly certified that the death was due to coronary thrombosis or indeed any other cause. He could not have known the cause, unless he was the cause. Dr Grenville drew attention to Mrs Virgin's appearance in death. This, he said, was not typical of the appearance to be expected following death from a heart attack, or indeed any of the other possible causes of a sudden death. It was, however, what might be expected following death from a lethal injection of opiate.
Conclusion
There are a number of suspicious features about this death.
The cause of death given by Shipman gives rise to suspicion. Although it is theoretically possible that Mrs Virgin could have died suddenly from a heart attack or some other cause of sudden death, a death from such a cause was unlikely. There was nothing in her general or recent medical history to suggest that she was at risk from a cardiac death or any other type of sudden death. Shipman told a lie on the MCCD when he said that Mrs Virgin had been suffering from ischaemic heart disease for 11 years. This was not supported by the medical records. Mrs Virgin's appearance in death was not what would be expected following a sudden natural death. I find it unlikely that Mrs Virgin died of a heart attack or any other of the common causes of sudden natural death.
There is clear evidence that Mrs Virgin was alive after Shipman's visit at about noon on 1st
March. There is evidence to suggest that she was dead by about 2.45pm. She was certainly dead by 4pm. If Shipman did not visit Mrs Virgin again that day, the only rational conclusion is that she died a sudden but natural death, unlikely though such a death might be. Although there is no direct evidence that Shipman visited for a second time on 1st
March, there is evidence from which it may be inferred that he did visit again. He had the opportunity, although that does not prove anything. There is evidence that Mrs Virgin was on Shipman's mind that day. He asked Mrs Smith whether she had seen her aunt. She could have been on his mind because he had just visited her but the comment is strange even so. The most powerful evidence in favour of a second visit by Shipman is that Mrs Virgin's door was unlocked when Mr Booth arrived at about 4pm, although it was securely locked when he arrived and when he left earlier that day. Mrs Virgin was conscious of the need for security. She usually kept her door bolted and chained. It seems to me likely that, if she were able to do so, she would secure the door after any visitor had departed. Had she died a natural death, I would have expected the door to be locked from within. That Mrs Virgin had not locked her door on an occasion during the afternoon of the day of her death suggests that she was unable to do so.
Shipman made a number of misleading statements on Form B. I have already discussed those statements and the reasons why I think they were made. I regard these statements as highly suspicious.
As Dr Grenville observed, if this were a natural death, Shipman could not honestly have certified the cause of death on the information available to him. Any honest doctor in his supposed position would have referred the case to the coroner.
Mrs Virgin's appearance in death was entirely typical of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of diamorphine.
I am sure that Shipman did visit Mrs Virgin again, at some time between 1pm and 2pm, and that he injected her with a lethal dose of diamorphine, thereby causing her death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001