The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Margaret Mary Vickers
Introduction
Mrs Margaret Mary Vickers (known as Rita) died at her home, 41 Bennett Street, Hyde on Tuesday, 25th
June 1996 at the age of 81. She had been a patient of Shipman since 1980 and followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought very highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that he considered the circumstances surrounding Mrs Vickers' death to be suspicious. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Patrick Christopher Grace (Mrs Vickers' nephew), Mrs Julie Grace (his wife), Mrs Joyce Campbell (Mrs Vickers' next door neighbour) and Mrs Gail Perry, who worked in a shop near Bennett Street and became friendly with Mrs Vickers.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Vickers but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr and Mrs Grace and from Mrs Campbell. The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), the cremation documents, Mrs Vickers' general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Vickers' telephone billing records, which are explained in a report by Detective Constable Sally Reid. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Vickers was a widow and lived alone. She drove a car until 1991. She was active and spent much of her time in her garden. She kept pigeons until about two or three years before her death and she also had a Staffordshire bull terrier, which she walked for about half an hour every day. She attended The Pensioners House, just behind the Market Street Surgery, for lunch every day. She used to drive there until she broke her hip in 1991.
Mr and Mrs Grace live in the Republic of Ireland. They were close to Mrs Vickers and visited her about every six weeks. Mr Grace recalls that Mrs Vickers' health deteriorated in the years before she died. Mrs Grace thinks that Mrs Vickers had arthritis, thyroid problems and breathing difficulties, which she thought were related to contact with pigeons. Mrs Grace also believes that Mrs Vickers may have had a series of 'mini-strokes'. Mrs Campbell told the Inquiry that she considered Mrs Vickers to be in good health.
Dr Grenville says that her medical records suggest that Mrs Vickers enjoyed reasonable health. She had been diagnosed as having an underactive thyroid gland in 1970, for which she was treated with thyroxine.
Mrs Vickers' medical summary card contains an entry made by Shipman, dated 1984, recording a diagnosis of angina. The handwritten general practitioner records suggest that Mrs Vickers consulted Shipman on several occasions during July 1984 and, on one such occasion, he diagnosed possible angina. He also recorded a diagnosis of angina on 9th
August 1984. There is, however, nothing in the notes to support this diagnosis. The entry of 9th
August suggests that Shipman intended to request a domiciliary visit from a consultant geriatrician. There are two letters in Mrs Vickers' medical records from Dr O M P Jolobe, consultant geriatrician. The first, dated 28th
August 1984, contains details of Mrs Vickers' thyroid function tests, which revealed that the dose of thyroxine she was taking was too high. The second letter, dated 4th
October 1984, records a diagnosis of asthma and possible 'bird fancier's lung'. There is no suggestion in either letter that Dr Jolobe felt that Mrs Vickers was suffering from angina.
There are also several entries in Mrs Vickers' medical records where Shipman has recorded ankle oedema and has made a diagnosis of congestive heart failure. Shipman often diagnosed this condition on the basis of very slender evidence. According to letters from Tameside General Hospital in 1992, there was no evidence of heart failure. However, Mrs Vickers was treated for this with diuretics until her death. Mrs Vickers' notes contain only a few recordings of her blood pressure and, in Dr Grenville's view, there is no evidence that she suffered from hypertension. In Dr Grenville's opinion, apart from the risk associated with her age, Mrs Vickers was not at an increased risk of suffering a stroke.
Some time during the week ending Saturday, 22nd
June 1996, one of Mrs Vickers' friends telephoned Mrs Grace to say that she thought Mrs Vickers might be unwell. She had noticed that her curtains were still closed in the mid-morning. Mr Grace spoke to his aunt on the telephone and gained the impression that she was not well. He and his wife arranged to visit on the following Thursday. Other evidence given by Mr and Mrs Grace confirms the overall picture that Mrs Vickers' health deteriorated in the month before she died and that she became quite unwell.
Either one or two days before her death, Mrs Vickers, who was standing at her gate, told Mrs Perry she had a cold and was feeling 'a bit rough'. Mrs Perry took Mrs Vickers' dog for a short walk and, when she returned, she noticed that Mrs Vickers was very pale and that her skin felt clammy.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Perry called to see Mrs Vickers on the morning of 25th
June 1996. Mrs Vickers was lying on her bed and looked worse than she had on the previous day. Her complexion was paler and she had a blue tinge around her lips. She was cold and clammy. Mrs Perry telephoned Shipman's surgery and requested a home visit. The receptionist told her that the doctor would visit after surgery. At Mrs Vickers' request, Mrs Perry also telephoned Mr Grace to tell him that his aunt was not well and that the doctor had been called.
The visit request slip, which would have been attached to Mrs Vickers' medical records, which Shipman would take on his rounds, reads as follows:
'
VISIT REQUEST
TIME MESSAGE RECEIVED: 8.55am.
DATE: 25/6/96
PATIENTS NAME: Mgt. Vickers AGE: 81
ADDRESS:
41 BENNETT ST
HYDE. Tel. 368 3746
DETAILS: IN BED.
Neck + shoulder pain
feels ill.
CAN THEY GET DOWN TO SURGERY.
YES
/NO
IF NOT, WHY NOT?
Feels to
(
sic
)
ill to move
N.B.
Msg from neighbour. Pt has left Back door open'
.
The practice visits book contains the following entry for that day:
'Mgt VICKERS 41 BENNETT ST HYDE
Neck & shoulder pain'
.
Mrs Perry returned to see Mrs Vickers at about 11.30am. Shipman had not visited and Mrs Perry telephoned the surgery again. She was told that Shipman was coming. Mrs Perry gave Mrs Vickers a cup of tea and a sandwich, of which she ate half. Mrs Perry then left the house. Mrs Vickers was lying on her bed.
Later that day, between about 1.30pm and 2pm, Mrs Joyce Campbell was at home when Shipman knocked at her door. He said that he could get no reply from Mrs Vickers' front door. According to Mrs Campbell, Mrs Vickers always kept her front door locked and used the back door. Mrs Campbell took Shipman through her house and went to Mrs Vickers' back door. Mrs Campbell opened the unlocked door and shouted out 'Dr Shipman's here, Mrs Vickers'. There was no response. Mrs Campbell left and Shipman went in.
Shipman returned to Mrs Campbell's house about ten minutes later. He told Mrs Campbell that Mrs Vickers had had a stroke and that he had called for an ambulance to take her to hospital. He asked Mrs Campbell to pack some clothes for Mrs Vickers. She said that she did not know where Mrs Vickers' clothes were kept but he said that Mrs Vickers would tell her. He did not say why he would not do this himself. Mrs Campbell followed him back into Mrs Vickers' house. Together, they went in to her ground floor bedroom and Mrs Campbell saw Mrs Vickers lying in bed dressed in her nightclothes. Mrs Campbell recalls that Mrs Vickers' gaze seemed 'fixed' and she said to Shipman, 'She doesn't look too good'. Shipman felt Mrs Vickers' neck and said, 'She's gone'. Mrs Vickers did not appear to be in any pain, although she did seem a 'funny colour'. Shipman picked up the telephone receiver from the bedside cabinet and said, 'Cancel that ambulance' or 'Cancel the ambulance'. Shipman then put the receiver down. Mrs Campbell does not know whether Shipman dialled any numbers because he had his back to her. He did not appear to provide an address or say who he was.
Shipman asked Mrs Campbell to help him in searching for the contact details of a next of kin. He found an address book next to the telephone and telephoned the number for Booth, Ince and Knowles, a firm of solicitors. The solicitors contacted Mr Grace and informed him of his aunt's death. Mr Grace was very shocked as the death was so sudden. According to Mrs Campbell, Shipman told her that she could leave Mrs Vickers as she was, because it was now 'up to the relatives'.
Mrs Vickers' handwritten medical records contain two entries for 25th
June 1996, the first of which is at the foot of a card and reads as follows:
'V
(
visit
)
CVA 100/60 conscious
TGH'
.
There is then, on a separate card, the following entry:
'V
CVA story of dizziness
for 2/7
speech
arm
leg
ref TGH aamb a
Spoke to neighbour to pack bag
12.00 died
1a CVA
2a IHD
Solicitor contacted'
.
Dr Grenville has interpreted this note to suggest that Shipman had made a diagnosis of a left-sided stroke and that Mrs Vickers had told him that she had been dizzy for two days. Her speech and the power in her left arm and leg were affected. He had referred Mrs Vickers to hospital and called an ambulance. He had then spoken to a neighbour about packing a bag. At noon, Mrs Vickers had died. There is no description of the circumstances in which Mrs Vickers died or was found dead. The causes of death were noted as a cerebrovascular accident and ischaemic heart disease.
The computerised medical records contain the following entry for the date of death, which corresponds broadly with the handwritten entry:
'CVA unspecified
1 speech arm leg ref tgh
O/E - dead
cva
Seen in own home
Dr H F Shipman'
.
The itemised telephone billing records show that several calls were made from her home on the afternoon of Mrs Vickers' death. At 2.06pm, a call lasting 23 seconds was made to Arthur Andersen, Chartered Accountants, Manchester. They were not Shipman's accountants and Mrs Vickers had no business with them. The number dialled relates to an extension within that firm's offices, which has never been activated. If the number is dialled it is automatically transferred to the receptionist. The call was extremely short. Shortly after that, at 2.09pm and 2.12pm, two short calls were made to the directory enquiry service. It seems likely that Shipman dialled the Arthur Andersen number in error and then tried to find the number he wanted from directory enquiries. Shipman might have been trying to contact a relative of Mrs Vickers to inform him or her of the death. Alternatively, he might have been making a call in respect of something unrelated to Mrs Vickers.
At 2.17pm, a call lasting 20 seconds was made to an emergency services number, allocated for doctors' use only. That call was so short that Shipman cannot have had time to give all the details necessary to summon an ambulance. It is likely that this was the short call remembered by Mrs Campbell. The fact that only one call was made to that number shows that Shipman cannot have called an ambulance, as he claimed. The Greater Manchester Ambulance Service has confirmed that no ambulance was requested of them to attend Mrs Vickers. At 2.19pm, a call was made to Mrs Batty at Booth, Ince and Knowles, solicitors. The call lasted 3 minutes and 18 seconds.
Mr Grace telephoned Mrs Perry to tell her of the death. When she went to the house later, she found Mrs Vickers' body lying on the bed.
The Aftermath
Mr Grace and his wife travelled to England to attend to the funeral arrangements. Mrs Grace collected the MCCD from Shipman's surgery. She recalls that she spoke to him and he was sympathetic. He explained that he had arrived at Mrs Vickers' house to find that she was very ill. He said that he had gone next door to call an ambulance and to get the neighbour to pack some clothes. He said that, when he went back to see Mrs Vickers, she had suffered a massive heart attack and was dead. He explained that Mrs Vickers had suffered a series of 'little heart attacks' for a while. He also said that she had suffered one stroke after another and, as a result, was paralysed on one side of her body. He said that Mrs Vickers had 'done well' for her age and that she had lived a good life. He said that he was shocked at the onset of the final stroke but it was not uncommon.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD on 25th
June. He certified that the cause of death was a left-sided cerebrovascular accident. The interval between the stroke and the death was about an hour. Ischaemic heart disease, which had been present for 12 years, had contributed to the death. He said that he had last seen Mrs Vickers alive on the day of her death.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He stated that the death had occurred at 2.15pm. He had attended Mrs Vickers for 30 minutes during her last illness. He last saw her alive immediately before death and he saw and examined the body immediately after death. The cause of death was stated as on the MCCD. The mode of death was said to be coma lasting minutes. Shipman said that his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and statements made by a neighbour. He said that he and a neighbour were present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Following consideration of the cremation documentation and the medical records, Professor Baker considered Mrs Vickers' death to be highly suspicious.
Dr Grenville says that, although Mrs Vickers had been unwell for a few days before her death, it did not appear that she was seriously ill. In particular, Dr Grenville observes that Mrs Perry does not mention any weakness of Mrs Vickers' limbs or slurring of her speech. Dr Grenville says that Mrs Campbell's description of Mrs Vickers after death could be consistent with a sudden catastrophic haemorrhagic stroke, while she was lying on the bed. However, Shipman's description of events is more suggestive of an evolving occlusive stroke. In Dr Grenville's view, the position in which Mrs Vickers was found is consistent with death from an intravenous injection of a lethal dose of a strong opiate. He says that the medical evidence suggests that it is extremely likely that Shipman killed Mrs Vickers and extremely unlikely that she died a natural death, as described by Shipman.
Conclusion
There are a number of highly suspicious circumstances surrounding this death. First and most obvious, the death occurred during a visit by Shipman and almost certainly in his presence. Dr Grenville says that it is most unusual for a patient to die suddenly during a visit by a general practitioner, unless the patient is known to be terminally ill or the doctor has been called out in an emergency in response to a report of symptoms indicating a life-threatening event such as a heart attack or stroke. Shipman was not summoned to Mrs Vickers in an emergency on 25th
June. He was called before 9am and did not attend until, on his timings, about 1.45pm. Many of Shipman's patients died in his presence and I am satisfied that these deaths were not a series of coincidences. The temporal association between Shipman's visit and the death gives risk to grave suspicion that he killed Mrs Vickers.
Although Mrs Vickers was unwell in the days before her death, it does not appear that she was seriously ill. She looked pale and unwell on the day of death but was able to eat a small snack. Mrs Perry had not noticed any signs of a developing stroke. Dr Grenville said in his generic evidence that an occlusive stroke does not usually lead to sudden death. Most occlusive strokes are not fatal; the patient usually survives, with or without some residual disability. If the stroke is to be fatal, it develops over several hours or days. The patient gradually sinks into a coma, which deepens until eventually death supervenes. The type of stroke which can cause a sudden death is a haemorrhagic stroke which affects the brain stem. In such a stroke there is no one-sided weakness. Thus, Shipman's description appears to describe two different types of stroke: an occlusive stroke, giving rise to left-sided weakness and slurred speech, followed by a haemorrhagic stroke causing sudden death. It is most unlikely that a patient would have two strokes of a different type in different parts of the brain at the same time. It seems to me that Shipman has fabricated the history of a stroke.
Shipman lied when completing Form B. He claimed that a neighbour (which must be a reference to Mrs Campbell) was present at the death. She was not. Shipman often did this when he wished to create the impression that he had not been alone with his patient at the time of death.
This course of events is quite typical of cases in which Shipman killed. He often claimed to have visited an elderly patient, found him or her to be very ill, made arrangements to admit him or her to hospital and then made some pretext for involving a neighbour. When he returned with the neighbour (in this case Mrs Campbell), the patient would have died suddenly, supposedly in his absence. In the present case, Shipman knew that the back door would be left open for him. Yet, when he first went to Mrs Campbell's house, he told her that there was no reply at Mrs Vickers' front door. I suspect that he had already seen Mrs Vickers and had killed her, then went to fetch Mrs Campbell, intending that she would come inside with him and together they would find Mrs Vickers dead. Shipman would then have been able to pretend that Mrs Vickers had died before his arrival. When Mrs Campbell did not enter the house with him, he changed his plan and waited several minutes before going to fetch Mrs Campbell for a second time. During that time, I suspect that he tried to make a telephone call but was unsuccessful. I am quite satisfied that he did not call an ambulance during this period, as he claimed. When a suitable time had elapsed, he went back to fetch Mrs Campbell, supposedly to pack Mrs Vickers' clothes. Of course, when they returned, she was dead. He pretended to cancel the ambulance. It is possible that Shipman's first visit to Mrs Campbell was not a ruse and that he had genuinely forgotten that he was supposed to go in by the back door. If so, he must have killed Mrs Vickers in the interval between Mrs Campbell's first and second attendances.
This case has Shipman's hallmark on it. I am quite sure that Shipman killed Mrs Vickers, almost certainly in the usual way, by giving her a lethal injection of diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001