The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
May Vizor
Introduction
Mrs May Vizor died at her home, 11 Goodier View, Hyde on Wednesday, 15th
December 1982 at the age of 57. She had lived with her husband, Mr George Edgar Vizor. Mrs Vizor had been a patient of Shipman since he moved to Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the information contained in the cremation certificate, the death of Mrs Vizor was moderately suspicious. The police took statements from Mrs Karen Minshull and Mrs Kathryn Julie Atkin, Mrs Vizor's two granddaughters.
An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
Mrs Vizor's medical records have not survived but the Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1982.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Minshull told the police that, at the time of her death, Mrs Vizor was still working as a machine assistant at a local textile factory. She suffered from angina, for which she took medication in the form of tablets. She also developed bronchitis each winter and had been off work, with bronchitis, shortly before her death. A week before she died, Mrs Vizor went to the Donneybrook Surgery to be declared fit for work. Mrs Minshull accompanied her on that visit. The visits book shows no evidence of any home visit to Mrs Vizor in the fortnight prior to her death.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Atkin told the police that she called on her grandmother at about 5pm on the day of her death. She thought she had stayed for about two hours, but it might not have been quite so long. In any event, during that visit, Mrs Vizor appeared well. Mrs Minshull said that she telephoned her grandmother at about 6pm to ask about her health. Mrs Vizor said that she was feeling better. She mentioned that Mrs Atkin had called in and had just left.
During the evening, both granddaughters were told by their mother, Mrs Barbara Shepley, that Mrs Vizor had died. The family congregated at 11 Goodier View, where Mr Vizor told them what had happened. He said that Mrs Vizor was going upstairs when she had a pain in her chest. She took an angina tablet and he telephoned Shipman. Over the telephone, Shipman advised calling an ambulance. He said it sounded as though Mrs Vizor was having a heart attack. Someone, either Mr Vizor or Mrs Norma Weaver, a neighbour, called an ambulance. When it arrived, the crew attempted unsuccessfully to resuscitate Mrs Vizor. Shipman then arrived at the house and said that he would certify the death.
Mrs Atkin recalls that, when she arrived at 11 Goodier View, Shipman was just leaving but the ambulance was still there.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not survived, but its counterfoil has been recovered. Shipman certified the cause of death as
'CT
(
coronary thrombosis
)
due to IHD
(ischaemic heart disease)
'
. The counterfoil records that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that Shipman had seen the body after death. Shipman said that he had last seen Mrs Vizor alive on 14th
December, the day before her death.
Mrs Vizor was cremated and Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He recorded the time of death as 5.50pm. He said that he had attended Mrs Vizor during her last illness for the past two years when she had had heart problems. He said he had last seen Mrs Vizor alive the day before her death. He had seen her about five minutes after death and had performed a complete external examination. The mode of death is recorded as collapse of only minutes' duration. This answer was based on the observations of Mr Vizor, who had been present at the time of the heart attack and at the moment of death.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Vizor died a natural death, almost certainly as the result of a coronary thrombosis, as certified by Shipman. All the evidence points to that conclusion.
I can understand why Professor Baker was suspicious when he saw the cremation forms. He would know that he could not trust Shipman's claims that Mrs Vizor had a history of heart problems and that her husband was present at the death. Now that Mr Vizor's account of events is known, all suspicions are laid to rest. In particular, there is clear evidence that Mrs Vizor suffered acute chest pain and that Shipman advised that the ambulance be called. Proper attempts to save Mrs Vizor had already been made by the paramedics before Shipman arrived at the house.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001