The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
George Edgar Vizor
Introduction
Mr George Edgar Vizor died at his home, 15 Thorpe Hall Grove, Hyde on Wednesday, 18th
October 1989 at the age of 67. He had been a patient of Shipman probably for about 12 years. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Vizor's death was cerebrovascular accident due to arteriosclerosis.
In January 2001, members of Mr Vizor's family expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of his death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Karen Minshull, Mr Vizor's granddaughter. There has been no inquest into the death.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Minshull and Mrs Elizabeth Christine Shawcross, Mr Vizor's home help. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1989 and the duty doctor transfer diary recovered from the Donneybrook Surgery. Although there is a record of Mr Vizor's details on the Donneybrook computer system, it does not contain any clinical details as Mr Vizor died at about the time when the computer system was installed. Mr Vizor's handwritten medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Vizor was a widower and lived alone in sheltered accommodation. Following the death of his wife in 1982 or 1983, he missed her greatly and became a little depressed. Mrs Minshull recalls that he had always suffered from poor circulation and had had three strokes before his death in October 1989. The first of these occurred in 1985 or 1986, after which Mr Vizor's mobility was restricted and he moved into his warden-supervised bungalow. He had two more strokes, at about 12 month intervals thereafter. He was not admitted to hospital following any of the strokes. For the last year or two of his life, he was housebound and had the assistance of a home help, Mrs Shawcross, who would visit each day. Mrs Shawcross remembers him as being a very quiet, nice man who did not speak much about himself. His midday meal was delivered each day by the meals on wheels service. His daughter, Mrs Barbara Shepley (Mrs Minshull's mother), did his shopping. Mrs Minshull recalls that her grandfather used to be a heavy smoker, although she thinks he might have stopped after his first stroke. She also recalls that in the last few months of his life, Mr Vizor was beginning to be a little confused.
Mrs Minshull recalls that her mother had made an arrangement with Shipman that he would call in on Mr Vizor if he was in the area. She does not know how frequently he visited on this basis. Mrs Shawcross says that she would telephone the surgery and ask for a visit if she felt that Mr Vizor was not well when she called in the mornings.
Mrs Minshull last saw her grandfather two weeks before he died and she remembers that he seemed to be his usual self and she was not unduly concerned about his state of health.
The Day of the Death
On 18th
October 1989, Mrs Shawcross arrived at Mr Vizor's home at about 9.30am, a little earlier than usual. She thought Mr Vizor did not look very well, so she went next door to telephone the Donneybrook Surgery to request a visit from Shipman. She recalls that the system was that unless a visit was required as an emergency, a request for a visit the same day had to be made before 10am. Mrs Shawcross does not think that she requested an emergency visit but remembers that she called soon after 9.30am to ensure that Mr Vizor was visited that day.
When Mrs Shawcross had done her jobs for Mr Vizor, she left him alone as usual. She did not think he was so unwell that he needed someone with him. She had told him that the doctor would be coming later. When she left, the door was on the latch. At about midday, Mrs Shawcross and another home help, Mrs Dorothy Foley, were visiting a resident near Mr Vizor's home and Mrs Shawcross told Mrs Foley that Shipman was due to visit Mr Vizor. The two women often helped each other with their respective clients. They agreed to call in on Mr Vizor later to see if he had been given a prescription.
According to the evidence of the former receptionists at the Donneybrook Surgery, a request for a visit would be entered in a visits book that remained at the surgery. When Shipman had finished seeing patients at the surgery each morning, he would consult the surgery visits book and enter the names of his patients who had requested a visit into his own visits book. From the layout of the relevant page of Shipman's visits book, it appears that he probably transferred the names, which included Mr Vizor's name, into his own book at some time after about 12.30pm.
Some time later, Mrs Shawcross remembers seeing Shipman's car outside Mr Vizor's flat and saw Shipman get into his car and drive away. About 15 to 20 minutes later, Mrs Shawcross and Mrs Foley went to Mr Vizor's flat. The door was locked, but through the glass panel Mrs Shawcross could see the bottom half of Mr Vizor's body on the floor in the doorway between the living room and the hallway. At the time, she thought that he must have got up to see the doctor out and then collapsed on his way back into the living room.
Mrs Shawcross did not have the key to Mr Vizor's flat and so she went to a neighbour's flat and pulled the emergency cord to summon the warden. The warden arrived quickly and together they went into the flat. They examined Mr Vizor's body and concluded that he was dead. Mrs Shawcross remembers that he looked peaceful and not as though he had been in pain. The warden then telephoned Mrs Shepley.
Mrs Minshull was not present on the day that her grandfather died, but Mrs Shepley told her about the death. So far as she recalls, Mrs Shepley told her that the home helps had said that Shipman had been at the flat about an hour before the death and that the home help had opened the door to him. That is not consistent with the evidence of Mrs Shawcross and I think it is likely that Mrs Shepley's understanding was unclear or her recollection has faded with time. Mrs Minshull also recalls that her mother told her that, when Shipman arrived after the death, he told her that, 'if it were any consolation, he would have been dead before he hit the floor'. Shipman had brought the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) with him.
Certification
The MCCD has not survived, but its counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman certified the cause of death as cerebrovascular accident due to arteriosclerosis. He said that he had last seen Mr Vizor alive on the day of his death, that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that he had seen the body after death. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 19th
October 1989; however, the first '9' appears to have been written over an '8', so it may be that the certificate was initially dated 18th
October.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He said that the time of death was approximately 2pm. He said that he had attended Mr Vizor during his last illness for about one hour. He said that he had last seen Mr Vizor alive about one hour before death, that he had seen his body about two hours after death and that he had performed a complete external examination of the body. The cause of death was as stated on the MCCD counterfoil. The mode of death was said to be collapse lasting only seconds. When asked to what extent his answers in relation to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others, he wrote:
'Own + daughters'
. He said that no one had nursed Mr Vizor in his last illness and no one had been present at the moment of death.
Conclusion
There are a number of highly suspicious circumstances surrounding this death. First and most obvious, Mr Vizor was found dead very shortly after Shipman had left his flat. The time interval might have been as little as 15 minutes or it might have been as much as an hour. In either case, it would be a startling coincidence if Mr Vizor had died suddenly, so shortly after Shipman's departure. If such an event were to occur with another doctor, I would accept it as coincidence, but with Shipman such apparent coincidences occurred very frequently. I cannot accept them as coincidence and I regard the temporal association between Shipman's visit and Mr Vizor's death as a highly suspicious factor.
Mr Vizor had had strokes in the past and was showing some signs of confusion, probably due to arteriosclerosis. He was therefore at significant risk of suffering a further stroke. Strokes do not usually give rise to very sudden death, although they can do, particularly in the case of a brain stem haemorrhage. Moreover, on the morning of the day of his death, Mrs Shawcross thought that Mr Vizor looked ill and asked for the doctor to visit. She did not consider his condition to be an emergency or needing supervision. In my view, a sudden death following a stroke was a real possibility.
On Shipman's account, as set out on Form B, he last saw Mr Vizor alive one hour before his death, although the witness evidence suggests that the time interval was rather less. He implies that he found Mr Vizor suffering from a stroke, as it is hard to see how else he could have known the cause of death. His condition at that stage must have been such that Shipman felt it appropriate to leave him alone and not, for example, to summon the warden or members of his family or to admit him to hospital. Then, according to Shipman, within one hour or less, Mr Vizor suffered a massive stroke, collapsed and died. Although this is a possibility, the coincidence would be remarkable.
Shipman lied on Form B in at least one respect. He claimed that Mr Vizor's daughter had provided him with some information upon which he had based his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death. Mrs Shepley did not arrive until some time after the death had been discovered. Apart from telling Shipman that her father had been found on the floor, which he must have known for himself, it is hard to see what else she could have told him. Shipman often told this type of lie on Form B as it helped to create the impression that he had not been the only person with any knowledge of the circumstances. I am also suspicious of Shipman's claim that Mr Vizor died at 2pm. If Shipman was not present at the death he could not have known when it had occurred. There was no way in which he could have made a proper assessment. If the death were to have been natural, it might have occurred within a few seconds of Shipman's departure or only a few seconds before the body was found. By suggesting a specific time, Shipman was distancing his visit from the death.
The position in which Mr Vizor was found is consistent with him having suffered a collapse, such as might occur during a massive stroke. In the great majority of cases in which Shipman has killed his patients, the body has been found sitting in a chair, looking peaceful, as if asleep. Mr Vizor's appearance therefore suggests that his death was natural. However, evidence of appearance is never conclusive. It is possible that Shipman gave him an injection of opiate and left quite quickly. Mr Vizor might have got up to show him out and collapsed on his way back to the living room. It is also possible that Mr Vizor got to his feet as soon as the injection had been given and collapsed quite quickly. Shipman could then have left him on the floor.
My conclusion is that Shipman probably killed Mr Vizor, by injecting him with a lethal dose of opiate. However, I stop short of saying that I am sure of that conclusion because Mr Vizor's medical history makes it quite possible that he could have suffered a fatal stroke and because his position in death was consistent with a death from that cause.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001