The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Frederick Vickers
Introduction
Mr Frederick Vickers died at his home, 41 Bennett Street, Hyde on Monday, 13th
August 1979 at the age of 66. He was probably a patient of Shipman, although this is not certain. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Vickers' death was acute left ventricular failure due to ischaemic heart disease and aortic incompetence.
The Inquiry has obtained a witness statement from Mrs Julie Grace, the wife of Mr Vickers' nephew, Mr Patrick Christopher Grace. The Inquiry has also had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil and Shipman's visits book for 1979. Mr Vickers' medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
At the time of his death, Mr Vickers was a retired shopkeeper and lived with his wife, Mrs Margaret Mary Vickers. The Inquiry has also investigated the death of Mrs Vickers, who died in June 1996.
In later life, Mr Vickers suffered from cardiac and respiratory problems. Mrs Grace thinks that he might have had 'valvular heart disease'. This would be consistent with Shipman's claim that Mr Vickers had a history of aortic incompetence.
Mr Vickers' mother died in 1976. By that time, his own health was already failing and he spent much of his time confined to bed. He was looked after by his wife and her friend, Mrs Kay Sutherland, both of whom had been nurses. Mr Vickers' condition deteriorated after 1976 and when his death came it was entirely expected.
The Death
Shipman's visits book shows that he visited Mr Vickers on the day of his death. Mr Vickers' name and address appear in the book in blue ink, although his name has been struck through and the word
'died'
has been written in red ink. Mr Vickers' name does not appear in the book for any other day during July or August. The visits book also shows that Shipman was
'on duty'
on that day but, as Monday, 13th
August must have been an ordinary working day, I think this must mean that Shipman was on duty in the evening. There is no reason to think that he visited Mr Vickers in the evening. Mr Vickers' name is the second name on the list.
Mrs Grace feels sure that Mrs Vickers and Mrs Sutherland would have been present when Mr Vickers died. She is clearly right, at least so far as Mrs Vickers is concerned, as the death certificate states that Mrs Vickers was present at the death. Mrs Grace thinks that Mrs Vickers and Mrs Sutherland would not have been easily duped in respect of medical matters and, if they had had any concerns about Mr Vickers' treatment, they would have voiced them. She does not believe that Shipman would have had the opportunity to harm Mr Vickers. I must bear in mind, however, that Shipman successfully deceived a great many people during the course of his career and the fact that Mr Vickers' wife may well have been vigilant on her husband's behalf cannot exclude the possibility that he was one of Shipman's victims.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On this, Shipman stated that Mr Vickers had died on 13th
August 1979. He said that he had last seen Mr Vickers alive on the day of the death. He said that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination. He gave the cause of death as acute left ventricular failure, which was due to ischaemic heart disease and aortic incompetence. The counterfoil is dated 13th
August.
The death certificate records that grand mal epilepsy had contributed to Mr Vickers' death.
Mr Vickers was cremated but the documentation has not survived.
Conclusion
Despite the absence of any direct evidence concerning the day of Mr Vickers' death, it does seem clear that he was seriously ill with heart disease. The chest problems which Mrs Grace remembers may well have been respiratory problems secondary to his heart disease. It does not appear that his death was unexpected when it came. His long-standing heart condition no doubt left him at increased risk of an acute cardiac death, which is what Shipman certified as having been the primary cause of his death.
Unfortunately, however, the absence of direct evidence makes it impossible to say with confidence whether Shipman did or did not play any sinister part in Mr Vickers' death. The fact that he certified that he saw Mr Vickers alive on the day of his death and saw the body after death gives rise to a degree of suspicion, as so many of Shipman's victims died during a routine visit. That Mr Vickers was known to be in poor health does not mean that Shipman would not have killed him. Shipman killed many patients who were in poor health and some who were close to death.
There are several possibilities. It is quite possible that Shipman was called out to see Mr Vickers because he was suffering from an acute cardiac episode, that Mr Vickers had died by the time Shipman arrived and that Shipman decided to certify the cause of death, saying that he had seen Mr Vickers alive that day so as to avoid the perceived inconvenience of referring the death to the coroner. Another possibility is that Shipman was called out in the morning because Mr Vickers had deteriorated and his wife had become concerned; or perhaps he was in discomfort or distress and Shipman came out to give him some medication which would make him more comfortable. Shipman might then have left and Mr Vickers might have died some time later. Shipman could have returned to confirm the death and certify the cause. Those circumstances might or might not give rise to suspicion that Shipman had given Mr Vickers something which had hastened his death. Yet another possibility is that Shipman was called out to see Mr Vickers, on account of some sort of deterioration in his health, and that Mr Vickers died in his presence. In those circumstances, the death would have to be regarded as suspicious.
Unfortunately these issues cannot be resolved and I regret that I am unable to reach a decision. I cannot say whether Shipman did or did not kill Mr Vickers, but I am suspicious that he did.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001