The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ada Warburton
Introduction
Miss Ada Warburton died at her home, 55 Grange Road North, Hyde on Friday, 20th
March 1998 at the age of 77. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Miss Warburton's death was one of a number recovered by the police from the register office in August 1998 and, after a preliminary assessment, it was decided that enquiries should be made into the death. The police investigated her death and took statements from Mrs Lesley Creasey (Miss Warburton's great-niece), Mr Alan Hadfield (her great-nephew), Mrs Catherine Cooper and Mr William Catlow (her neighbours) and PC John Damian Hodkinson of the Greater Manchester Police. The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Miss Warburton, but an inquest was held on 24th
January 2001, at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mrs Creasey, Mrs Cooper and Mr Catlow and has also had access to Miss Warburton's general practitioner records, as well as appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the evidence and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Warburton had never married and had lived alone since the death of her sister in 1988. She was a healthy woman and lived an active life. By all accounts she was very cheerful and had a lively sense of humour. Her only chronic condition was rheumatoid arthritis, which was monitored by blood tests. For her aches and pains she occasionally took ibuprofen, an anti-inflammatory drug.
The Day of the Death
On 20th
March 1998, the day of her death, Miss Warburton went shopping in Hyde and kept a dental appointment. Her neighbour from number 59, Mr Catlow, saw her leaving at about 10am and called out to greet her. She responded in her usual cheerful manner. Later that morning, her friend, Mrs Cooper, who lived next door at number 57, met her in Tinker's Passage in Hyde at about 11.20am. Miss Warburton was returning home with her shopping. The two women had a chat and a laugh together. Miss Warburton looked well and made no mention of feeling unwell. Mrs Cooper was a close friend of Miss Warburton and they always told each other if they had any minor health problems. The two women parted, promising to see each other later. Mrs Cooper told the police that she returned home at about 2.15pm and could hear Miss Warburton moving about in her house. The dividing wall was very thin. Mrs Cooper and Miss Warburton had an arrangement that, if either of them were to be taken ill or need help, they would knock on the adjoining wall to attract the other's attention.
When we come to the events which occurred that afternoon, there are a number of differences between the account Mrs Cooper gave to the police in 1998, and that which she gave to the Inquiry in 2001. Some parts of both statements are not wholly consistent with the evidence of the police officer who attended Miss Warburton's house on the evening of the day of her death. Mr Catlow has also made a police statement and an Inquiry statement, between which there are no significant differences. However, both are very brief and not entirely consistent with either of Mrs Cooper's accounts. I have done my best from the material available to piece together the events of the afternoon.
At some time later that afternoon, Shipman knocked at Mrs Cooper's door. He asked whether Mrs Cooper knew if Miss Warburton had any relatives. Mrs Cooper told him that Miss Warburton's nearest relative was a niece (in fact a great-niece) who lived in Scarborough. She asked why and Shipman said that Miss Warburton was 'poorly' and had called him out. I interpose to say that the surgery records contain no reference to any request by Miss Warburton. Nor does the visits book contain any sign that Shipman intended to visit her. Only one name appears in the visits book for that day. The billing records confirm that no telephone call was made from Miss Warburton's home to the Market Street Surgery on the day of her death.
Mrs Cooper was puzzled by the news that Miss Warburton was unwell and said that she should go in to see her. Shipman strongly discouraged her from doing this. Shipman went away and Mrs Cooper saw him walking up and down the garden path and on the road. She did not see his car. She went to look through Miss Warburton's window and it appeared to her that her friend was sitting on her settee watching television. In her statement to the Inquiry in 2001, she said that at this time Miss Warburton had a cup of tea or coffee in her hand, although she did not mention that detail to the police in 1998.
Some time later, Shipman came to Mrs Cooper's house again and told her that Miss Warburton had died. His expression was 'She's gone'. In her police statement, Mrs Cooper said that this occurred about ten minutes after Shipman had first come to her house. In her Inquiry statement, she said that the second time she saw him was about an hour after the first and that it was by this time growing dark. When Shipman said that Miss Warburton was dead, Mrs Cooper remarked that she could not believe it as she had seen her that morning coming back from the shops. Shipman replied: 'That's the way it goes'. Mrs Cooper went into Miss Warburton's house and found her sitting in the same position as before, on the settee facing the television, although it was now clear to Mrs Cooper that Miss Warburton was dead. Her left arm was hanging over the arm of the settee and she was still holding her spectacles. Her right arm was across her body. A half-drunk cup of tea or coffee was on the floor at her side. Mrs Cooper gave Miss Warburton a hug and had the impression that the body was already stiff. She was wearing the same clothes that she had been wearing that morning, when out shopping. Both sleeves were rolled up but the left sleeve was rolled up further, above the elbow. In her first statement, Mrs Cooper said that she then waited until the police arrived. In her recent statement, she says that, when she went in to see the body, a young police constable was there. I am satisfied that a police officer did not arrive until 7pm.
Mr Catlow recalls seeing Shipman only once that afternoon; he thinks that this was at about 1pm but it was probably later. He says that he was in his garden when he saw Shipman walk up Mrs Cooper's path. Shipman recognised him and called out to him. They exchanged a few words. A few moments later, Mrs Cooper came out of her house and said that Miss Warburton was dead and Shipman confirmed that this was so. Mr Catlow was very shocked. According to the Force Wide Incident Number (FWIN) Report, Shipman telephoned the police from Miss Warburton's house at 6.17pm. No ambulance attended nor was there any suggestion that one was called.
At about 6.45pm, Shipman telephoned Mrs Creasey. She recalls that Shipman told her that Miss Warburton had telephoned the surgery at about lunchtime to say that she thought she had had a stroke. He had been to see her in the afternoon but could not detect any signs of a stroke. He had asked her whether she would like to go into hospital but she said she would not so he left, promising to return later. At this stage, Mrs Creasey asked where Miss Warburton was and Shipman told her she was dead. He said he thought she had died about an hour before; she had been sitting on the settee watching television. He said there were no visible signs of a stroke and that there was 'no mess'. He presumed she had suffered a stroke. He gave Mrs Creasey the impression that he had made two visits to the house that afternoon. He said he had asked the police to come to secure the house. He asked her to collect the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) from the surgery the next day. His manner seemed inappropriately brisk.
The FWIN confirms that, at about 7pm, PC Hodkinson arrived at Miss Warburton's house. Shipman was speaking on the telephone. Mrs Creasey recalls that, at one stage, the officer took the telephone from Shipman and also spoke to Mrs Creasey. Whether he was present throughout Shipman's conversation with Mrs Creasey is not clear. He recalls that his conversation with Mrs Creasey was mainly concerned with identifying a firm of undertakers who should be instructed. Mrs Creasey recalls that the officer spoke about the arrangements for securing the property. More recently she has recalled that the officer suggested to her that there might have to be a post-mortem examination but then he quickly appeared to change his mind and said that that would not be necessary.
PC Hodkinson recalls that, when he arrived at the house, he saw the body and spoke to Shipman. Shipman told him that he had seen Miss Warburton at his surgery that morning after she had been shopping. After some discussion, Shipman had arranged to visit her at home after his evening surgery. When he arrived, he had found her dead. The officer asked Shipman if he intended to issue an MCCD. Shipman said that he would and added that he sometimes thought of referring a death for post-mortem examination, just out of interest, to see exactly what the person had died from, but in this case he was 'pretty sure' that it was a stroke, so he was prepared to issue the certificate.
The surgery appointments sheets for that day do not contain Miss Warburton's name. When asked by the police, staff at the surgery could not recall Miss Warburton visiting the surgery on the day of her death.
Shipman made two entries for 20th
March 1998 in the Lloyd George records. The first reads:
'V
(
visit
)
15.00
Called. slurred speech this am
now better 130/80
O/E NAD no sign of CVA.
Chat probable TIA'
.
I interpret that to mean that Shipman had visited at 3pm. Miss Warburton told him that her speech had been slurred that morning. It was now better. He found her blood pressure to be 130/80 (which is normal). On examination he found nothing abnormal and no sign of a stroke. He told her he thought she had probably had a transient ischaemic attack.
The second entry reads:
'V
(
visit
)
1815 Dead found by neighbour
18.00hs
(
I think although the 8 could be a 6
)
: dead 30-40 minutes
only
Relative contacted
D-
CVA
'
.
I interpret this as a record that Shipman had visited at 6.15pm and had learned that Miss Warburton had been found dead by a neighbour at 6pm. When he saw her, he estimated that she had been dead for 30 to 40 minutes. He had contacted a relative. The cause of death was cerebrovascular accident. Between 6.15pm and 7.15pm, Shipman made three telephone calls to his home from Mrs Warburton's house.
Two similar entries were made on the surgery computer, shortly after 8.40am, the following morning. The first recorded as follows:
'[D] Slurred speech
this am but now ok 130/180 no signs cva plantars down possible tia
aspirin 75 1 od tluk 1500hrs'
.
The second entry reads:
'O/E - dead
1815 cert about 45 mins say 1730 relative contacted cva'
.
Certification
Shipman signed the MCCD giving cerebrovascular accident as the cause of death. The interval between onset and death was said to be six to eight hours. He had last seen Miss Warburton alive on the day of her death. He also completed cremation Form B, giving the time of death as
'About 17.30 hours'
. He said he had attended Miss Warburton for five hours during her last illness. He had last seen her alive at 5.30pm (which is also the time he gave as the time of death) and had seen the body 45 minutes after death. He said that the mode of death was coma lasting
'half an hour or so'
. He knew this from information provided by neighbours at 79 Grange Road North who had been present at the death.
The Expert Evidence
Doctor Grenville reviewed Miss Warburton's medical records and concluded that she was not at a particularly high risk of suffering a stroke. There was one record of a slightly elevated blood pressure reading dated 15th
May 1997. The other blood pressure readings were normal.
Conclusion
It appears that Shipman's version of events, as taken from the medical records, the MCCD and Form B, is that Miss Warburton began to suffer a stroke during the morning, some six to eight hours before her death; that would be between 9.30am and 11.30am. She telephoned the surgery at about lunchtime to say that she thought she might be having a stroke. Shipman seems to time his attendance during the last illness from that time. He visited her at about 3pm according to the medical note but at 5.30pm according to Form B. He then found no reason to think she was having a stroke but promised to return later on. He returned later at 6.15pm and found that she had died about 45 minutes earlier.
This account can be shown to be false in some respects. First, the evidence shows that there was no neighbour (whether from number 79 or at all) who could have provided Shipman with any information about the mode of death. Nor was a neighbour (whether from number 79 or at all) present at the moment of death. Further, there is no evidence to support Shipman's claim that Miss Warburton was concerned about slurred speech in the morning. Nor is there any evidence to support his claim that Miss Warburton telephoned the surgery to ask him to visit. I think it is highly unlikely that she did so. Had she been concerned about herself in the morning she would almost certainly have told Mrs Cooper when they met. Also, when Mrs Cooper returned home, Miss Warburton would probably have told her that she was expecting the doctor. Shipman told PC Hodkinson that Miss Warburton had come in to the surgery in the morning but he told Mrs Creasey that she had telephoned to ask for a visit. Shipman told Mrs Creasey that there was nothing apparently wrong with Miss Warburton when he visited in the afternoon; yet he told Mrs Cooper that she was very poorly. Shipman was either present at the death or, if not actually in the room at the moment of death, he was near the house. Yet he has pretended that the death occurred after he had departed. The death must have occurred much sooner than Shipman claims. Mrs Cooper is not certain of the time but her first recollection, which I believe is likely to be the more accurate, is that she first saw Shipman at about 3.30-3.45pm and that Miss Warburton was dead within about 15 minutes after that. I think it likely that Mr Catlow is right in implying that he learned of the death while he was outside in his garden. Although I cannot be sure of the timings of events, I am sure that Shipman's various statements are full of inconsistencies and I am sure that his account is a tissue of lies.
Miss Warburton was fit and well in the late morning of 20th
March. She did not seek a visit from Shipman and Shipman lied in suggesting that she had. I am satisfied that he paid an unsolicited visit, probably at about 3pm. I think he found some excuse to give her an injection of diamorphine. Possibly he told her he would take a blood sample. He then waited a while and went to speak to Mrs Cooper. He virtually forbad Mrs Cooper to visit her friend. When Mrs Cooper looked through the window and saw Miss Warburton apparently watching television, she was almost certainly unconscious and close to death. I think Shipman remained in the vicinity, possibly returning to his car before coming back to the house to check that Miss Warburton was dead. I think he then told Mrs Cooper of the death and Mr Catlow learned of it as well. I think Mrs Cooper is probably mistaken when she says that she stayed with the body until the police and undertakers arrived. It is possible that the death was not 'discovered' by Shipman until the early evening, in which case the recollections of both Mrs Cooper and Mr Catlow are inaccurate in any event.
Shipman gave inconsistent accounts of the events of the day and made false entries on Form B. If Miss Warburton's death had been natural, Shipman could not possibly have known what had caused it and he would, if honest, have referred it to the coroner.
Miss Warburton's appearance in death was very similar to that of many of Shipman's victims and was consistent with death from opiate overdose.
Despite the uncertainty as to the time of the discovery of the body, I am sure that Shipman killed Miss Warburton, by injecting her with a large dose of opiate, almost certainly diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001