The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Walls
Introduction
Mrs Mary Walls died at her home, 1 Werneth Avenue, Gee Cross, Hyde on Friday, 14th
November 1997 at the age of 78. She was a widow and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs Walls, was one of a number recovered by the police from the register office in August 1998, and after a preliminary assessment it was decided that enquiries should be made into the death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Eileen Morris and Mrs Margaret Tipper (two of Mrs Walls' daughters), Mrs Dorothy Wilkinson (her younger sister), Mr Hedley Robert Wilkinson (her brother-in-law), Mrs Margaret Elizabeth Lomas (her niece), PC Stephen James Crundell (her grandson), Mr Thomas William Mellor (her nephew), Mr Ronald Pickford, Mr James Henry Parker and Ms Alice Lees (her friends) and Mr Graham Thomas Hough (a driver employed by C Middleton and Son funeral directors). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Walls but an inquest was held on 6th
February 2001, at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing. (The coroner mistakenly recorded on the Coroner's Certificate after Inquest that the inquest was held on 5th
February.)
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mrs Morris, Mrs Tipper, Mrs Lomas and Mr Mellor. A statement has also been provided by Mrs Christine Pollitt, Mrs Walls' other daughter. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Walls' general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
At the time of their mother's death, Mrs Walls' three daughters, Mrs Morris, Mrs Tipper and Mrs Pollitt, all lived away from the Hyde area. Mrs Walls' younger sister, Mrs Wilkinson, lived in Essex. PC Crundell, Mrs Lomas and Mr Mellor all lived locally.
Mrs Walls was a retired bookkeeper. Members of her family have said that she had a number of long-standing health problems. She had contractures of the fingers, hardening of the arteries and thyroid problems. She had also mentioned angina problems but she did not apparently take medication for these. She had stomach pain in the last year or so of her life. Towards the end of her life, she was developing cataracts. Despite these problems, she led a normal life. She was a very active member of the local church. She did yoga to keep herself supple. Dr Grenville, who has examined her medical records, says that her blood pressure was always normal. Her blood cholesterol was slightly raised on one occasion in 1989, but apart from one brief reference to 'angina control' in August 1996, there was no clear evidence that Mrs Walls was suffering angina or ischaemic heart disease. Dr Grenville considers that Mrs Walls was not at a particularly high risk of a sudden cardiac death.
On the day before her death, Mrs Walls provided tea for PC Crundell and Charlotte, his four year old daughter. Mrs Walls was in good spirits and played with Charlotte. PC Crundell and Charlotte left Mrs Walls' home at about 7.30pm. At no time did Mrs Walls say she felt ill.
The Day of the Death
On the afternoon of Friday, 14th
November 1997, Mrs Wilkinson received a telephone call from Shipman. He explained that he had seen Mrs Walls in the surgery that morning when she was 'not feeling very well'. She had refused his advice to go to hospital and he had said that he would visit her later that day. He had done so and had found her unwell. He listed the family members whom he had tried to contact and, when asked how Mrs Walls was, said that she was dead. His manner was brisk.
At about 3.50pm that day, Mrs Lomas received a telephone call from Shipman. Shipman said: 'Hello this is Dr Shipman. Do you know Mrs Walls' address?' Mrs Lomas, who was also a patient of Shipman, said: 'Hello Dr Shipman this is Mrs Lomas, yes it's 1 Werneth Avenue, Hyde'. She formed the impression that Shipman had made contact with her because her number was one of several programmed into Mrs Walls' telephone. Shipman then said: 'I'm with Mrs Walls now; she's just passed away'. Mrs Lomas immediately went to Mrs Walls' house. On walking up the path, she saw that the front door was open. She found Shipman in the living room, standing in front of Mrs Walls, who was sitting upright in her usual armchair, with her head tilted slightly forward. She was fully clothed and there was no sign that any of her clothing had been loosened. She looked as though she had fallen asleep. There was a footstool at her feet but her feet were not on it. Mrs Lomas asked Shipman what had happened. He replied: 'She's had a coronary. She came to see me this morning because she wasn't feeling very well. She had a coronary in the night and I wanted her to go to hospital but she wouldn't go'. Shipman also said that he had told Mrs Walls that he would call round to see her in the afternoon. Mrs Lomas asked Shipman whether her aunt was dead when he arrived. Shipman said: 'No, but she was unconscious'. The conversation then continued about the people that Shipman had tried to contact by telephone to inform them of the death. Shipman went over to Mrs Walls and lifted one of her eyelids. He held it open momentarily and then let it go, allowing it to close again. Mrs Lomas looked around for a key for the front door and asked Shipman how he got in. Shipman replied: 'The door was open'. Mrs Lomas thought that this was unusual because, unless Mrs Walls knew that someone was due to call, her doors were always kept locked. According to Shipman, of course, his visit was awaited. Just before he left, Shipman said: 'There's no need to call the police or the coroner as I've seen her and I will issue a death certificate'. He then picked up his medical bag and left the house.
For the day of Mrs Walls' death, the morning appointment is recorded in the surgery record. She was due to see Shipman shortly before 10am. The computerised record for the day of the death has an entry made at 10.17am in which it is said that Mrs Walls told Shipman that she had had two episodes of chest pain in the past week. He diagnosed these as angina. According to Dr Grenville, it is possible that Mrs Walls developed angina, coincidentally just before her routine visit to see Shipman. However, Mrs Morris and Mrs Tipper found it strange that their mother had not contacted a member of the family if she had had chest pain.
The second entry in the records for the day of the death states:
'O/E dead
1530 found collapsed 90/50 thready pulse chest pain died in coma
& relatives told'
.
This would imply that Mrs Walls suffered a severe heart attack and deteriorated rapidly to the point that she died just as Shipman visited her later in the day.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), giving the cause of death as coronary thrombosis. He said that the interval between the onset of the coronary thrombosis and death was about 18 hours, although this appears to have been altered from 12 hours. He gave hypothyroidism as a condition that contributed to the death but was unrelated to the cause of death. Dr Grenville thinks Shipman was mistaken in mentioning hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid) as Mrs Walls' medical records mention hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid).
Shipman subsequently completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that death had occurred at 3.30pm on 14th
November 1997. He said he had attended the deceased for six hours during her last illness. He said he saw the body immediately after death and made a complete external examination of it. He gave the cause of death as on the MCCD. Shipman stated that the mode of death was collapse of minutes' duration. When asked to what extent his replies to the questions concerning the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on the statements of others, he wrote:
'Self and Neighbour'
. He also claimed that both he and a next door neighbour were present at the death. In fact, no neighbours were with Mrs Walls at the time of the death.
The Aftermath
On the morning of 15th
November 1997, Mrs Tipper telephoned Shipman. Shipman told her that her mother had had a routine appointment on the Friday morning at the surgery in connection with her cataracts. Whilst she was there, she had told him she had had a 'funny turn' in the night. This had lasted for two hours and she had had pains in her chest and pains down her arms. Shipman thought she must have had a heart attack and told her she ought to go to a hospital to be looked after. She said she did not want to go to hospital, she wanted to go home. He had told her to go straight home and do nothing. He would visit her that afternoon, after surgery. He had gone to visit her at about 3pm. She had left the door on the catch for him to walk straight in. He had gone inside and found her in her rocking chair. He thought at first that she was dead but found that she was still alive but in cardiogenic shock. He roused her sufficiently to get some telephone numbers. He wanted to get her into hospital. However, she had died.
Mrs Tipper thanked Shipman for what he had done and told him that her mother had always thought highly of him. Shipman's manner was pleasant but not very sympathetic.
Mrs Morris and her husband were on holiday in Cyprus when they learned of Mrs Walls' death. They returned to England immediately and came to Hyde. Mrs Morris, who is an occupational health nurse, visited Shipman in his surgery on 17th
November. He handed her the MCCD and expressed his condolences. He brought up Mrs Walls' medical records on the computer screen and showed them to Mrs Morris. He said that Mrs Walls had attended his surgery on the morning of 14th
November on a routine visit but, while there, had mentioned that, during the previous night, she had had chest pains which she described as angina. Shipman said that he thought Mrs Walls had suffered a mild heart attack. He said that he wanted her to go to hospital but she had refused, saying that she would rather go home. She added that she had plenty of people to look after her. To Mrs Morris, this account seemed plausible, as Mrs Walls was very independent. Shipman said that he told Mrs Walls he would visit her at home in the afternoon before his evening surgery. He said that, when he arrived at her house, he found the door unlocked. He said that he found Mrs Walls in a state of cardiogenic shock. Shipman said that Mrs Walls was conscious and was able to tell him where her address book was and who to telephone. Shipman said that he had managed to get hold of Mrs Walls' niece, Mrs Lomas, who came to the house. He had waited until she arrived. To Mrs Morris, Shipman's explanations seemed entirely reasonable and gave her no cause for concern.
Mrs Walls' funeral service was held at Holy Trinity Church in Gee Cross on 24th
November 1997. Mrs Marie Quinn attended the funeral. Mrs Quinn was murdered by Shipman later that day.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker found the case highly suspicious on account of the contents of both the cremation forms and the medical records.
Conclusion
Although Dr Grenville considered that it was theoretically possible that events might have occurred as Shipman claimed, in my view, such an occurrence is very unlikely. If this were the only time that Shipman had claimed that a patient of his had died suddenly in his presence, I might be inclined to accept the claim. But if Shipman is to be believed, his patients frequently died in his presence. He cannot be believed. Coincidences of this nature do not occur time and time again.
Mrs Walls was well on the evening before her death. There is no reason to think that she was ill the following morning. She went into Hyde to see Shipman for a routine appointment in connection with her cataracts. It is unlikely that she would not have spoken to a member of her family if she really had suffered from chest pain either during that night or during the previous week. I think it more likely that, when Shipman saw her that morning, he decided to kill her. He made a false entry in the computerised record suggesting that she had chest pain. This was to lay the ground for a supposed heart attack later in the day. I do not think there was ever any question of Mrs Walls going into hospital for chest pain. I think that was pure fabrication. Shipman often claimed that his patients had refused to go into hospital shortly before they were found dead. I do not know what excuse Shipman made to visit Mrs Walls later that day. He might have simply arrived unexpectedly. I think it likely that Mrs Walls let him in. He probably made an excuse to take a blood sample. I think he then gave her a lethal injection of a strong opiate, probably diamorphine. Mrs Walls would have soon slipped into unconsciousness and died. Her appearance in death was entirely consistent with a death from morphine overdose and not typical of a death from coronary thrombosis. Shipman then telephoned the names in Mrs Walls' address book until he found someone who would come and take over the practical problems.
His subsequent accounts to the family were fictional, as were many of the entries he made on Form B. His story to the family does not ring true. If Shipman had found Mrs Walls in cardiogenic shock, the first thing he would have done would be to telephone for an ambulance. He did not. As for Form B, it was not uncommon for him to claim falsely that another person had been present at the death. I am satisfied that he did that in order to create the impression that he was not alone with his patient throughout the process of death.
I am sure that Mrs Walls was killed by Shipman.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001