The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Maria West
Introduction
Mrs Maria West (also known as Marie) died on 6th
March 1995 at the age of 81. She was a widow who usually lived alone. At the time of her death, her son had been staying with her for a few days. He said she seemed in reasonably good health and was fairly fit for her age. In recent weeks, she had begun to suffer pain from arthritis in her legs, hips and back, for which she took anti-inflammatory drugs. She also had poor circulation in the legs. She had recently started to use an inhaler for asthma. Despite these problems, she was still leading a busy social life and was about to book a Butlins holiday. She had not complained to her son of blurred vision or dizziness or numbness of the hand.
The Circumstances of the Death
On 27th
February and 2nd
March 1995, Mrs West had consulted Shipman about her arthritis. He had prescribed pethidine tablets but these had not agreed with her and she had asked him to visit her on 6th
March. Her good friend, Mrs Marion Hadfield, visited her on that day. Mrs West made cups of tea and carried them into the living room. Then the two women chatted, watched television together and waited for the doctor to arrive. Mrs Hadfield said that Mrs West was quite well during this time. She did not have any trouble with blurred vision and she did not complain of dizziness or numbness of the hand.
Shipman arrived while Mrs Hadfield was upstairs using the bathroom. When she came down, she could hear voices coming from the living room, so she remained in the kitchen so as not to intrude. After a while, the voices ceased. Then Shipman came into the kitchen. He seemed surprised to see her and said he was going to see if Mrs West's son was upstairs as Mrs West had 'collapsed' on him. Mrs Hadfield asked if he could do anything for her. He said it was too late; she had 'gone'. Mrs Hadfield went into the living room and found Mrs West sitting in the chair exactly where she had been before. Shipman did not attempt resuscitation. He just raised Mrs West's eyelid and said there was no sign of life. He told Mrs Hadfield that he had just turned away to pack his bag and, when he turned round, he found that Mrs West had collapsed.
Shipman telephoned Mrs West's son, Christopher, and told him that he had taken his mother's blood pressure and had gone out to put the machine in the car. When he came back in, he found her dead. When Mr West arrived, Shipman told him that his mother had had a massive stroke. Shipman said that he had expected her to die as she had hardening of the arteries but had not expected it to happen so soon. He had not tried to resuscitate her, as she would have been a vegetable if she had been brought round. He did not suggest a post-mortem examination.
The Defence Case
Shipman's account, the essential aspects of which the jury must have rejected, was that he had visited Mrs West on 6th
March to see how her back pain had been since she had been taking pethidine. If the pain were not resolving, she would have to be referred to a consultant. Mrs West told Shipman that the back pain had improved but she now had another problem. She had noticed altered vision and weakness in the arm and leg, lasting for an hour or so at a time. Shipman turned away to reach into his bag for his stethoscope and blood pressure machine. He spoke to her but there was no response. When he looked at her, she was slumped in her chair. He examined her and found that she was dead. He did not attempt resuscitation as in his opinion, if revived, she would have been severely disabled. He found the son's telephone number and went into the kitchen to look for the telephone. (In fact the telephone was in the living room.) In the kitchen, he found Mrs Hadfield and told her that Mrs West had collapsed and died. When Mrs Hadfield asked if he was sure that Mrs West was dead, he tested the carotid pulse again and proved the point by showing Mrs Hadfield the dilated pupils. He telephoned Mr West and told him of the death. He did not say that Mrs West had collapsed while he was outside collecting his bag. When Mr West arrived, he explained to him how the death had occurred. He mentioned the possibility of a post-mortem examination but Mr West did not want one.
After the death, Shipman made an entry in the medical records in which he stated that Mrs West had complained of blurring of vision and weakness in the arm. Strangely, he did not mention that she had died in the middle of the examination. The Crown suggested that this record was a fabrication, designed to add plausibility to his false account of her death. As the jury convicted, one must infer that they found that Shipman must have given Mrs West an injection of diamorphine soon after his arrival.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), saying that the cause of death was a cerebrovascular accident of only a few minutes' duration. A contributory cause was arteriosclerosis of 18 years' duration.
When completing cremation Form B, Shipman said that he had been present at the death with a neighbour. He said he had carried out a complete external examination. He felt no doubt as to the cause of death and there was no reason for further examination of the body.
The Expert Evidence
Dr John Grenville, who had examined the records, said that for many years Mrs West had been at risk of having a stroke. She had had high blood pressure on two occasions in 1990 but this had been well controlled since then. She had also had a suspicion of carotid bruit and a fleeting episode of blindness. The records also revealed chronic bronchitis and asthma but these were not relevant to the death. The records for the week before her death showed that Mrs West was prescribed pethidine for hip pain. The only possible reference to a vascular problem was an entry for 4th
March which said:
'pethidine for pain, TCI'
,
which could have meant 'to come in' or, as Shipman claimed in evidence, 'transitory cerebral ischaemia'.
Dr Grenville said that Shipman's account of Mrs West's sudden transition from life to death did not ring true. Death did not occur in that way. If Shipman's account of the collapse were true, he should have attempted resuscitation and called an ambulance. Anything less was not acceptable as Mrs West was not terminally ill. Further, he said that the history recorded by Shipman of a complaint of blurred vision and weakness in the arm sounded more like the symptoms of a mild evolving stroke than the kind of severe stroke that can cause a sudden cerebrovascular death. The cause of death given on the MCCD could not be justified and the case should have been reported to the coroner.
Comment
This was a cremation case with no direct evidence of morphine in the body tissues. There are a number of significant features about this case, all of which are common to other cases:
The death took place in Mrs West's home and while Shipman was alone with her. This is a highly suspicious factor, as other general practitioners say that this is an extremely rare event.
Death was extremely sudden, so sudden that it could not have happened as Shipman claimed.
Shipman made no attempt to resuscitate the patient and justified his decision by claiming that she would have been severely disabled if revived.
Mrs West's appearance in death, sitting peacefully in a chair as though asleep, was similar to the appearance of many of Shipman's other victims.
Shipman gave inconsistent accounts of the circumstances to different people. However, it must be borne in mind that the accounts of friends and relatives may not be wholly reliable due to the passage of time and the effect of shock and distress.
There was a dispute as to whether Shipman mentioned the possibility of a post-mortem examination. The relative said he did not. Shipman made no report to the coroner in a case in which such a report was plainly called for, as the death was sudden and unexplained.
To explain Mrs West's death, Shipman selected a moderately plausible cause, in that there were features of her medical history which put her at risk of a stroke.
Shipman wrote on cremation Form B that a neighbour was present at the death. Although she was in the house, Mrs Hadfield was not in the room at the moment of death and the statement that she was present is misleading. This is a typical example of the way in which Shipman would make false statements, seeking to distance himself from the death or to make it appear he had not been alone with the patient at the time of death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001