The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Laura Kathleen Wagstaff
Introduction
Mrs Laura Kathleen Wagstaff died on 9th
December 1997, the day before Mrs Bianka Pomfret. She was aged 81. She was a patient of Shipman and thought highly of him.
The Circumstances of the Death
Mrs Wagstaff was in good general health at the time of her death. On the day on which she died, she went shopping in Hyde at about lunchtime. At about 1.45pm, Shipman left the surgery without saying where he was going. A neighbour saw Mrs Wagstaff letting him into her flat, some time between 2pm and 3pm. She seemed pleased and surprised to see him. Another neighbour saw him arrive and saw him again in the car park after about 20 to 30 minutes.
In the mid-afternoon, Shipman went to a neighbour and told him that Mrs Wagstaff had died. He said he would inform the relatives and left. Shipman erroneously informed Mrs Wagstaff's daughter-in-law that her mother had died. He discovered his mistake when he spoke to Mrs Carol Chapman, a receptionist at the surgery. Then, Mrs Wagstaff's son, Peter, was informed and went to the house. He found his mother slumped in her chair. She had been slightly sick.
Shipman told Mr Wagstaff that his mother had telephoned the surgery, asking for a visit. That was a lie. No call had been made from Mrs Wagstaff's house to the surgery. Shipman claimed that the surgery staff had paged him and, as he was close by, he had visited her. On arrival he had found Mrs Wagstaff looking ill, very grey, sweating and blue round the mouth. He had helped her upstairs and settled her in her chair. He said that he had found her pulse was 'thready' so he telephoned for an ambulance. That was a proven lie. He said he went to fetch his bag from the car and when he returned he found that Mrs Wagstaff had slumped over and died. He had checked her pulse. He had cancelled the ambulance. That was also a proven lie. He said nothing about an attempt at resuscitation. He said she had had a heart attack and had not suffered. She had had heart disease of a kind that could 'carry you off' quite quickly. Mr Wagstaff was surprised, as he was unaware that his mother had heart problems. In fact she had not.
The Defence Case
In evidence, Shipman's account, which the jury rejected, was that he had been in the reception area of the surgery at about 3pm when he had taken a call from Mrs Wagstaff. That was a lie. He claimed that she said she had chest pain and did not feel well. She had not had it before. She needed him to visit. He took out her notes and went straight there. She let him in and went slowly upstairs to her flat where she sat in her chair in the corner. He had his bag and notes with him. She looked grey and cyanosed. Her pulse was fast, over 100 beats per minute. The blood pressure and heart sounds were normal. There was no sign of a chest infection. He listened to her heart and thought she might be having a coronary thrombosis. He told her she ought to be in hospital to confirm the diagnosis. He said he would write up the notes and then ring for an ambulance. He claimed to have written up the notes but subsequent examination of the notes revealed no entry in them. He said that he had then realised that her mouth was open. She had died. He attempted resuscitation but she was too big to move. He tried mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and external cardiac massage while she was still in the chair. He did not call for help from the paramedics as he was doing everything that could be done for her. After ten minutes, he knew he could not revive her so he set about informing the relatives of the death.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) saying that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis, which had begun 30 minutes before death. An underlying condition was ischaemic heart disease of eight to ten years' onset. As Mrs Wagstaff was to be cremated, he completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that he had seen Mrs Wagstaff on the day of her death. He claimed that a neighbour had been present at the death, which was untrue.
Dr Alastair MacGillivray from the Brooke Surgery signed Form C, confirming that he was satisfied that the death was due to coronary thrombosis. He said he relied totally on the account given him by Shipman. He would not expect any external signs if Mrs Wagstaff had died of coronary thrombosis.
The Expert Evidence
Dr John Grenville said that Mrs Wagstaff's records showed that she had been very healthy for her age. There was no sign of heart disease. There were two entries showing raised blood pressure but no real hypertension. The entry describing the death was very brief. It said:
'call 1500 arrive 1515 def ct collapse died 1520'
.
Dr Grenville said that, if Mrs Wagstaff had collapsed in the way Shipman claimed, the doctor should have called an ambulance immediately, as every effort should have been made to resuscitate her. She was a very fit woman for her age. Resuscitation needs more than one person.
Comment
This was a cremation case so there was no direct evidence that the cause of death was morphine poisoning. Nonetheless, the jury convicted. The salient features of this case are:
Mrs Wagstaff was in good health and her death was wholly unexpected.
Shipman made an unsolicited visit to Mrs Wagstaff. His claim that she had summoned him was a lie. He must have made his mind up in advance that he was going to call on her and kill her.
The death took place in Shipman's presence. Most doctors say that it is extremely unusual for a patient to die suddenly during a home visit.
On Shipman's account of the sudden collapse, there was no excuse not to call an ambulance and to make a proper attempt to resuscitate. No doctor would behave as he did in the circumstances he described.
His two differing accounts both contained proven lies. In particular he had not telephoned the ambulance station.
Shipman chose to say that Mrs Wagstaff had died after a coronary thrombosis. However, her medical records showed that she was not likely to suffer such a death. Shipman usually chose a cause of death which would be plausible in the light of the medical history. However, Mrs Wagstaff was not suffering from any potentially fatal condition.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001