The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Amy Whitehead
Introduction
Mrs Amy Whitehead died at her home, 122 Haughton Green Road, Denton on Monday, 22nd
March 1993 at the age of 82. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed Shipman when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of death was myocardial infarction.
In December 1998, Mrs Whitehead's son, Mr Ian Whitehead, contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances of his mother's death. The police investigated and took statements from Mr Whitehead, Mrs Mary Jacqueline Whitehead (Mrs Whitehead's daughter-in-law and Mr Whitehead's wife), Mrs Valerie Bailey (Mrs Whitehead's daughter) and Ms Ghislaine Brant (a pharmacist at the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy). The police also took statements from Dr John Grenville and Dr Alan Banks.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Whitehead but an inquest was held on 27th
March 2001 at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing.
The Inquiry has taken additional statements from Mr Whitehead, Mrs Mary Whitehead and Mrs Bailey. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Whitehead's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Whitehead was a widow and lived alone. She had an alarm pendant connected to the telephone network which she could use in case of emergency. From about 1983, her medical records show that she was suffering from high blood pressure and congestive heart disease. Mrs Whitehead took medication for these conditions and they did not prevent her from leading a full and active life. In January 1993, she had a mild stroke, which caused some weakness in the right arm, but she made a good recovery from this. On 4th
March 1993, Mrs Whitehead was admitted to hospital for a minor gynaecological procedure. Mrs Bailey, who lives in the south of England, came to Hyde to be near her mother and to look after her on discharge from hospital. Mrs Whitehead recovered well and, after a few days, Mrs Bailey returned home confident that her mother was well able to look after herself. She had been reassured that there was nothing seriously wrong, as is confirmed by the discharge letter dated 9th
March. A further letter, dated 11th
March, informed Shipman that Mrs Whitehead's recent chest x-ray showed that her heart was enlarged and there was some pulmonary vascular congestion but that otherwise the lung fields were clear.
Following her return south, Mrs Bailey spoke to her mother regularly on the telephone. There was no cause for concern. Mrs Whitehead's son, who lives in Altrincham, Greater Manchester, visited her at least once a week and spoke to her regularly by telephone. He too thought his mother was well.
Sunday, 21st
March was Mother's Day and Mrs Bailey had sent her mother some flowers. They spoke to each other during the evening. Mrs Whitehead sounded well. She was delighted with the flowers. She had some friends in that evening and she seemed in good spirits. Mr Whitehead also spoke to his mother that day. She mentioned that she had been having a bit of a stomach upset and was going to ask Shipman to visit. She did not want to risk going into Hyde on the bus.
The Day of the Death
The surgery visits book for Monday, 22nd
March contains an entry giving Mrs Whitehead's name, address and telephone number. It says:
'Stomach trouble - diarrhoea - started in night-'
.
In the late morning of 22nd
March, Shipman telephoned Mr Whitehead's home. He spoke to Mrs Mary Whitehead. He said that he was calling from Mrs Amy Whitehead's home. He said he was on a visit and had found Mrs Whitehead in heart failure. He said that he had given her an injection. He advised that the Whiteheads should not rush over, as, by the time they arrived, Mrs Whitehead would have died. Mrs Mary Whitehead asked, 'What if we come now?' Shipman told her to calm down, to have a cup of tea and not to rush. Mrs Whitehead asked how long he would be at the house and he said, 'I've got the living to see to and not the dead'. He agreed a time at which he would meet them at the house.
Mr and Mrs Whitehead arrived at the house at about 1pm. Shipman was there, drinking a cup of tea. Mrs Whitehead was seated with her legs up on the settee and her arms folded on her lap. Her head was bent forwards. She was fully dressed in day clothes. Mrs Mary Whitehead remembers that her mother-in-law's arms looked badly marked and her neck was 'a very funny colour', as though it was bruised. During the course of the conversation, Shipman asked Mr Whitehead whether 'it would it be all right if we call it heart failure?' Otherwise, he explained, he would not be able to issue a certificate and there would have to be a post-mortem examination. Mr Whitehead, who did not want a post-mortem examination, said that if heart failure was the cause of death, then the certificate should be issued. Shipman issued the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) there and then.
Mr Whitehead later noticed that there was every sign that his mother had carried out all her usual household tasks that day. She had made her bed, prepared her lunch and put some washing on the line. She must have gone up and down the stairs several times.
Mrs Whitehead's medical records show that Shipman visited her on 22nd
March and that she gave a history of constipation followed by diarrhoea and abdominal pains for 48 hours. She is recorded as having a pulse of 40 per minute, appearing grey in colour and having blood pressure of
'90/?'
, which is very low. Her respiratory rate was noted to be 25 breaths per minute and her breathing shallow. Shipman recorded a diagnosis of coronary thrombosis. He recorded the administration of 10mg morphine sulphate intravenously. As Shipman did not keep a controlled drugs register, he should not have had any morphine sulphate with him. However, it is now well known that he usually carried diamorphine with him.
The controlled drugs register from the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy records that, on the day of Mrs Whitehead's death, a 30mg ampoule of diamorphine was dispensed to Shipman, in her name. It is not possible to ascertain the time at which this prescription was dispensed.
Certification
As I have said, Shipman completed the MCCD while at Mrs Whitehead's house. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been recovered. On that, Shipman stated that the cause of death was myocardial infarction and that congestive heart failure contributed to the death but was not related to the condition that caused the death. He said that he had last seen Mrs Whitehead alive on the day of her death. He had seen the body after death. There was to be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He mistakenly gave the date of death as 23rd
March 1993. The time of death was said to be
'13.40hrs'
. The family is adamant that that cannot be right, as they had already learned of the death and Mr and Mrs Whitehead had travelled from Altrincham to Hyde before then. Shipman says that he attended Mrs Whitehead for 30 minutes during her last illness. He was present at the death and examined the body immediately afterwards. The cause of death is stated as on the MCCD counterfoil. The mode of death is said to have been collapse of only minutes' duration. Shipman's answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were said to be based on his own observations. He mentioned Mrs Whitehead's minor gynaecological procedure, which had been carried out by Dr Goldthorp at Tameside General Hospital.
The Aftermath
Two days after her mother's death, Mrs Bailey went to see Shipman to thank him for attending to her mother. He told her that he had intended to visit her mother after surgery but 'something told him to go and he went round earlier'. He told her that he did not know how Mrs Whitehead managed to let him in as she was in heart failure. During this conversation, Shipman said that he had telephoned Dr Goldthorp, the consultant at Tameside General Hospital, and that between them they had decided that 'it was fairer not to resuscitate her'. Shipman said that, following this conversation, he had decided not to resuscitate Mrs Whitehead. He gave Mrs Bailey the impression that Dr Goldthorp knew something about the medical background, which would justify allowing her mother to die. There is no record of any such conversation in Mrs Whitehead's hospital records and Dr Goldthorp has told the police that he and Shipman did not have a telephone conversation about Mrs Whitehead on 22nd
March 1993.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville has reviewed all the medical records, including electrocardiographs (ECGs) dated 16th
January 1984 and 3rd
March 1993. These demonstrate quite severe ischaemic damage to the heart muscle. Chest x-rays dated 18th
January 1984 and 3rd
March 1993 demonstrate that the heart was enlarged. This is a sign of cardiac failure. A report from Dr Goldthorp dated 11th
March 1993 confirms this point. Taking the ECGs and x-rays together, Dr Grenville concluded that Mrs Whitehead was at a very high risk of having a heart attack at any time. Not surprisingly, he considered it very unusual that Shipman should claim that he had decided not to attempt to resuscitate Mrs Whitehead after consulting with Dr Goldthorp. The ordinary course would be to undertake emergency resuscitation.
Professor Richard Baker regarded the death as highly suspicious on the basis both of the medical records, which he found quite inadequate, and following consideration of Form B, which reveals that the death occurred while Shipman was alone with his patient.
Conclusion
This death is highly suspicious, if only because it took place while Shipman was alone with his patient. This is something that occurs only rarely in the experience of other doctors. If Shipman is to be believed, a natural death in the presence of the doctor is commonplace.
Although Mrs Whitehead was at a very high risk of suffering a heart attack, the evidence as to her condition on the day before her death points to her being fit and well but for gastrointestinal upset. It is clear that the reason she asked Shipman to visit was on account of that and not because of anything such as chest pain, which might indicate the onset of a heart attack. Common sense would suggest that it would be a great coincidence if a patient who has requested a visit for one condition should suddenly develop an unrelated life-threatening condition while the doctor is on his way to visit. I think it highly likely that Mrs Whitehead was suffering only from a stomach upset and did not complain of any symptoms relating to her heart.
Shipman claims that, when he arrived, Mrs Whitehead was in heart failure to such an extent that he wondered how she had managed to let him in. Yet, his medical note of the consultation suggests that she first told him about her bowel trouble. This is a feature I have observed in some other cases where Shipman has claimed that the patient was obviously ill and yet has recorded discussions about relatively minor and less urgent problems. I am suspicious of Shipman's claim that Mrs Whitehead was obviously ill when he arrived.
Shipman told Mrs Mary Whitehead that he had given her mother-in-law an injection. In the records he said that this was 10mg morphine sulphate. That would be reasonable treatment for someone suffering severe pain from a heart attack. He could not lawfully have been carrying this drug and there is no evidence that he obtained it unlawfully. When she saw the body it was obvious to Mrs Mary Whitehead that Shipman had given an injection. The arms were bruised. It rather sounds to me as though Shipman had some difficulty in finding a vein and caused bruising of the arms. As he knew this would be visible, he has pre-empted the questions which would be asked by volunteering that he has given an injection and specifying one that was acceptable treatment. However, as Shipman was not known to carry morphine sulphate but was known to carry diamorphine, one must suspect that this injection was in fact diamorphine. It is known that Shipman obtained 30mg diamorphine that day in Mrs Whitehead's name. We do not know whether he obtained that before he went to her house or later in the day. In either event, there must be a grave suspicion that he either obtained this amount in advance to use on her or he has obtained it afterwards to replenish his stocks.
Later, Shipman was at pains to explain his decision not to attempt resuscitation. He must have known that the decision could not have been justified on the basis of the facts as known to him. He sought to involve Dr Goldthorp, implying to the family that Dr Goldthorp knew that Mrs Whitehead was suffering from cancer and would have faced a painful death.
Mrs Whitehead's appearance in death was not typical of that found in patients who have suffered a heart attack. It was, however, very similar to the appearance of many of Shipman's victims who are known to have died as the result of diamorphine poisoning.
In my view, there are so many suspicious features surrounding this case that I have been driven to the conclusion that Shipman killed Mrs Whitehead. Like the coroner, I am sure that he did so.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001