The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Maureen Alice Ward
Introduction
Miss Maureen Alice Ward died on 18th
February 1998 at the age of 57. Some time before her death, she had suffered from cancer but she had been successfully treated. She had other medical problems and was seeking early retirement on medical grounds.
Personal Background
At the time of her death, Miss Ward appeared to her friends to be in good health. For several years, she had lived with her mother at Ogden Court, sheltered accommodation in Hyde, and had stayed on after her mother's death. She was about to leave Hyde and was looking forward to moving to Southport. Most of her belongings were packed. In addition, she had booked a Caribbean holiday, starting on 1st
March. In the afternoon of the day before the day of her death, Miss Ward attended Shipman's surgery to discuss her continuing need to take tamoxifen, an anti-cancer drug. Mrs Carol Chapman, the receptionist, chatted with her. Miss Ward appeared to be in good health and spirits.
The Circumstances of the Death
On the morning of her death, Miss Ward helped an elderly resident by carrying a heavy bag of bedding across to the laundry. Then she went shopping in Hyde to buy a new dress for her holiday. The residents of Ogden Court were astonished to learn that Miss Ward had died later that day. They would have been even more astonished had they known that Shipman was to certify her death as due to carcinomatosis, which is the expression used to describe cancer which has become so generalised that it is not possible to specify which organs are affected. Patients with carcinomatosis do not usually die suddenly.
At about 3.30pm on 18th
February 1998, Shipman called upon Mrs Christine Simpson, the warden of Ogden Court, and asked her to come to Miss Ward's flat. He said he had just found her dead. When Mrs Simpson expressed surprise, Shipman said, 'Well she did have a brain tumour you know'. Knowing that Miss Ward was very strict about security, Mrs Simpson asked Shipman how he had gained entry to Miss Ward's flat. He said that Miss Ward had been expecting him and she had left the lock 'on the snip'. He said he was bringing her an appointment letter for her to go to Stepping Hill Hospital. When Mrs Simpson reached the flat, she found Miss Ward lying on her bed, fully dressed in day clothes. Her eyes were closed and she looked 'completely straight and tidy'. In the kitchen there were signs that Miss Ward had been interrupted while spooning some cat food onto the cat's dish.
At about 4pm, Shipman returned to the surgery and told Mrs Chapman that Miss Ward was dead. He told her that he had been passing the corner of the street and had seen an ambulance outside Ogden Court. He had called in and the paramedics had told him that Miss Ward was dead. The following day, Mrs Chapman heard Shipman tell other members of staff that he had called at Miss Ward's home to give her an appointment. She claims to have observed out loud that that was not what he had told her the day before.
The Defence Case
Shipman's account in evidence, which was rejected by the jury, was that he had seen Miss Ward twice on the day before her death, not once as the records showed. At lunchtime, he had noticed her in the reception area and she had asked to have a word with him. He took her to his room and she told him she had been having some 'funny do's' with headaches and blurred vision. These had settled and she had not gone to the optician. About a week earlier, she had found herself on the floor. She had wet herself. Shipman thought it sounded as if she might have had an epileptic fit, which can be a sign of a brain tumour. He had been unaware of these symptoms until 17th
February. When he learned of them, he inserted them into the records at the dates at which Miss Ward said these events had occurred. He thought this was a proper way to amend the records and he had not intended that the records should be misleading. They plainly were. When she told him of these events, he advised her that she must see her consultant at Stepping Hill Hospital, Mr Peter England, as a matter of urgency. That afternoon and the next morning he had made considerable efforts to get Miss Ward an early appointment but had been unable to get through to the hospital. So he had written her a letter of referral which she could take with her. He went round to give her this letter and to advise her to attend the next clinic, but found her already dead.
Certification
Shipman signed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), giving the cause of death as carcinomatosis of eight weeks' duration (with a secondary tumour in the brain). He said that breast cancer had been an underlying condition. He stated that he had seen Miss Ward alive on the day of her death. As Miss Ward was to be cremated, he completed a Form B repeating that diagnosis but stating that he had last seen Miss Ward alive 24 hours before her death. He said that the mode of death was collapse of 'minutes' duration. That information was based on information from the warden who had found Miss Ward in a collapsed state. The warden had been present at the moment of death. These statements were untrue.
Dr Susan Booth signed Form C, saying she too was satisfied that death was due to carcinomatosis. Any enquiry of anyone who knew Miss Ward (such as the warden) would have shown this to be false and would have revealed the falsity of the claim on Form B.
The Medical Records
Examination of the medical records showed that several false entries had been made on the day of the death. Some had been made before the body was discovered, some afterwards. Some entries were designed to show that, during the previous two months, Miss Ward had exhibited signs of a brain tumour. On 17th
February, a genuine contemporaneous record was made of the consultation about the long-term need to take tamoxifen. At about 2.45pm, on 18th
February, a series of three backdated entries was made, purporting to have been made on 17th
December 1997 and 6th
and 17th
February 1998. These entries included references to headaches and blurred vision. The headaches had been accompanied by nausea and unsteadiness in the legs. On 17th
February, examination had supposedly shown raised intracranial pressure. Another entry, made at about 5.45pm on 18th
February, suggests that Miss Ward had told Shipman that, about six days earlier, she had found herself on the floor and she had wet herself. Shipman wondered whether she had had an epileptic fit. These entries were clearly designed to lend credibility to Shipman's explanation for Miss Ward's death. Dr John Grenville said that, without the false entries, there was nothing to support the diagnosis of carcinomatosis or brain tumour. In any case, a death from those causes is a slow process in which the patient develops neurological signs and suffers a gradual reduction in consciousness.
The remaining entries made on 18th
February were all made at about 5.45pm, that is after Miss Ward was known to be dead. One says that Miss Ward was dead on examination. Another says that she had been referred for further care and was to have an urgent appointment with Mr England. She had been seen in her own home. These entries were designed to support Shipman's account of his reason for visiting Miss Ward at home on the occasion when he supposedly found her dead.
The doctors responsible for her supervision at Stepping Hill Hospital reported that Miss Ward had attended for periodic review and had made no complaint of any symptom referable to a brain tumour.
Comment
Although this was a cremation case, with no direct evidence of morphine poisoning, it was a very clear case of murder:
This was a sudden death discovered very shortly after Shipman had had access to Miss Ward alone and the opportunity to inject diamorphine.
The cause of death was not plausible given the past medical history. Miss Ward was not terminally ill. Even with heavily altered records, Shipman's explanation for the death did not make medical sense.
Shipman gave a false account of events on Form B where his entries were plainly designed to distance him from the death.
Miss Ward's appearance was not what one would expect if Miss Ward had had a sudden collapse. On the other hand her appearance was consistent with her having been given an injection of diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001