The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Joseph Frank Wilcockson
Introduction
Mr Joseph Frank Wilcockson died at his home, 62 Dow Street, Hyde on Monday, 6th
November 1989 at the age of 85. Mr Wilcockson was a widower who lived alone in a ground floor flat. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and thought highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions, Mr Wilcockson's son, Mr Roy Wilcockson, contacted the police, expressing concern about his father's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Miss Lisa Clare Wilcockson (Mr Wilcockson's granddaughter), Mrs Angela May Beech (his home help) and Mrs Jennifer Kenyon (the district nurse who visited Mr Wilcockson on the day of his death).
An inquest into Mr Wilcockson's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Miss Wilcockson and has also obtained statements from Mr Roy Wilcockson and his wife, Mrs Jacqueline Ann Wilcockson. Miss Wilcockson and Mrs Beech gave oral evidence at a hearing on Monday, 16th
July 2001 and Mrs Kenyon gave evidence at a hearing on Thursday, 19th
July 2001. Mr Wilcockson's medical records have not survived and no relevant surgery records are available with the exception of Shipman's visits book for 1998.
Personal Background
Mr Wilcockson was thought to suffer from angina and high blood pressure and had retired from his work as a heavy goods vehicle driver, apparently on account of his angina, some 25 years before his death. Those conditions did not appear to restrict his activities in any way and he regularly walked into Hyde. He also had problems with a varicose leg ulcer which, when open, caused him much pain and required regular dressing by the district nurse. His granddaughter, Miss Lisa Wilcockson, said that, if he needed the doctor, he always went to the surgery. She had never known Shipman pay him a visit.
Mr Wilcockson was a busy and active man and was described by his home help, Mrs Beech, as 'a bit of a character'. She said that he had a lively sense of humour. He was extremely close to his granddaughter, who visited him daily and with whom he went out regularly in the evenings.
For many years, Mr Wilcockson had been active in the organisation of working men's clubs. On the night before his death, he and his granddaughter went out together to several clubs. They had a very good social evening and returned to Mr Wilcockson's flat at about midnight. Miss Wilcockson said that her grandfather seemed well at that time. He had not said anything to her about expecting Shipman to visit the next day. She was sure that he would have mentioned it if a visit had been arranged.
The Day of the Death
The following morning, 6th
November, Mrs Beech visited Mr Wilcockson. She was not due to work at his home that day but called in for a short unofficial visit. She arrived some time between 9am and 10am. She found him a little subdued that day and, unusually, she found he had not made his bed. When she remarked on this, he was very apologetic and she assured him it was nothing to worry about. She made it for him and then left. Unusually, he did not accompany her to the door when she left. Instead, he stayed sitting in his chair. She had been with him for about 15 minutes. Miss Wilcockson has suggested a reason why her grandfather might have been in low spirits that day. The next day, 7th
November, would have been the anniversary of the death of his wife. Every year, he put a verse in the memorial column of the local newspaper. Miss Wilcockson believes that he must have telephoned the newspaper on the morning of 6th
November to place the entry, as it appeared as usual the following week.
At about noon, the district nurse, Mrs Kenyon, attended to change Mr Wilcockson's dressing. Mr Wilcockson always left the door unlocked when she was expected. She let herself in as usual and at first only saw the back of Mr Wilcockson who was sitting in his chair. She greeted him and started chatting to him but then realised that he had not responded. She went to him and found that he was dead. He was still warm and she concluded that he had just died. She telephoned the surgery to ask Shipman to come to Mr Wilcockson's flat. She now recalls that there was some difficulty in making contact and it was some time before he arrived. She waited at the flat, as she did not want to run the risk that any other elderly resident might walk in and find Mr Wilcockson dead. She thought about resuscitation but decided against it on account of Mr Wilcockson's age and because she had the impression that he was lonely and missed his wife. She thought that it was a nice way to die, quietly in his own flat. While she was waiting she noticed that the crêpe bandage on Mr Wilcockson's leg had been disturbed. It was not as she had fixed it on the previous occasion. Mr Wilcockson did not usually undo it. It was not completely undone and did not have one end trailing on the floor. It appeared to Mrs Kenyon that the bandage had been undone and then loosely rewound. She came to the conclusion that Mr Wilcockson must have been looking out of the window, must have seen her parking her car and must have bent down to undo his bandage. He must then have had a sudden episode and died.
Mrs Kenyon said that, when Shipman arrived, he did not examine Mr Wilcockson at all. She explained how she had found him, told him why she had not attempted resuscitation and expounded her theory of how he must have died. Shipman did not volunteer that he himself had visited Mr Wilcockson that morning, as he is now known to have done.
Thinking back about Mr Wilcockson, Mrs Kenyon said that the death was most unusual. As a district nurse, she was not unaccustomed to finding a client dead. However, she had never found anyone in the situation of Mr Wilcockson, sitting up in his chair.
It appears that Shipman did not know the telephone number of Mr Wilcockson's family so he telephoned Mrs Beech who advised Shipman to call Mr Roy Wilcockson, whose number was to be found in Mr Wilcockson's address book. Apparently, however, the first number Shipman called was Miss Wilcockson's work number. By the time he telephoned her, she had left work. She finished work that day at noon and was on her way home for lunch. She said that, when she arrived at her parents' home at about 12.20pm there was a message that she should telephone Shipman at her grandfather's flat. She did so and Shipman told her that her grandfather had died. He said that he was leaving and would put the key through the door.
Miss Wilcockson and her parents went to the flat immediately and found Mr Wilcockson sitting in his chair fully dressed, his hands on his knees, looking as if he was asleep. He still had his glasses on and was still warm. The bandage on his right leg looked as though he had started to undo it. The television was on. In the kitchen, they found clear signs that Mr Wilcockson had made and eaten a cooked breakfast as usual but had not washed the dishes.
Later in the day, Miss Wilcockson and her father, Mr Roy Wilcockson, went to Shipman's surgery to collect the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Shipman's attitude on that occasion struck Mr Roy Wilcockson as impersonal and different from his usual caring manner. Miss Wilcockson's recollection is that Shipman told her he had visited that day and had found her grandfather in reasonable health. He was as surprised as she was to learn of the death.
Certification
The MCCD has not survived but its counterfoil has been found. The cause of death is given as coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease and (although the writing is hard to read) it is apparent that Shipman last saw Mr Wilcockson alive on 6th
November, the day of his death. This confirms Miss Wilcockson's recollection that Shipman had told her that he had visited that morning, as does Shipman's visits book for the day.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate on which he gave the time of death as
'1230hrs'
and indicated that he last saw the deceased alive two hours before death. That would mean that he had visited at 10.30am. Whilst that is not impossible, he would normally have been in his surgery seeing patients until about 11am each morning. However, his surgery might have finished earlier than usual. On Form B, Shipman claimed to have attended Mr Wilcockson for two hours during his last illness. The mode of death is given as syncope lasting seconds only and that answer is said to be based on his own observation and that of the district nurse. Form B also records that no one was present at the time of Mr Wilcockson's death. It is hard to see how Shipman or the district nurse could have known about the mode of death or for how long the process had lasted. However, it may be that Shipman has relied upon Mrs Kenyon's theory as to how Mr Wilcockson had died, which, as she explained, was no more than a theory.
The hour of death given on Form A, which was signed by Mr Roy Wilcockson, was noon. Shipman gave it as 12.30pm. Miss Wilcockson is convinced that the time of death must have been earlier than 12.30pm, as she was already aware of the death by 12.20pm. However, Mrs Kenyon said that it was possible she had told Shipman that she arrived at 12.30pm and thought that Mr Wilcockson had only just died. It is not surprising that there are differences of recollection about the times at which events occurred, where witnesses are trying to remember events from so long ago. In any event, I do not think that anything turns on these differences. The essential course of events has been established. Perhaps Shipman's claim that he visited at 10.30am is of some significance. According to the surgery staff, Shipman's usual routine at this time would be to do a morning surgery from 8.45am until about 11am or 11.15am, after which he would do some administration and paperwork before going out on his visits. Although Shipman's visit might have taken place at 10.30am, it seems to me that the most likely time would have been about 11.30am.
Conclusion
There are very suspicious circumstances surrounding Mr Wilcockson's death. Shipman admitted that he visited Mr Wilcockson during the morning of his death and, on the evidence, no one saw Mr Wilcockson alive or spoke to him after Shipman's visit. This in itself gives rise to grave suspicion that Shipman was implicated in the death.
It is not possible for me to form any view as to whether Mr Wilcockson was at serious risk of a sudden death from heart attack. As there are no surgery records, it is not possible to tell whether there were any clinical signs of heart disease. Miss Wilcockson says that she had never known her grandfather to have an angina attack. Nor is it possible to tell how well his blood pressure was controlled. I recognise that, at the age of 85, and with some reported history of angina and raised blood pressure, Mr Wilcockson probably faced an increased risk of sudden cardiac death.
The lack of medical records for the day of death is less serious, as so little reliance can be placed on any record made by Shipman of circumstances surrounding a death. However, it is unfortunate that it has not been possible to check whether or not Mr Wilcockson requested a visit on 6th
November. If there were a request for a visit it would probably have given some indication of what symptoms Mr Wilcockson was experiencing at the time. It might have given some indication of urgency. Shipman did not volunteer to the family the reason for his morning visit. Indeed, he seems to have made no more than a passing reference to it. If he had visited in response to a request, particularly an urgent request, I would have expected him to tell the family about it and I am sure Miss Wilcockson would have remembered the detail. In fact, Miss Wilcockson says that Shipman told her that her grandfather had been quite well when he had called and said that he was surprised at the death. Also, when Shipman was called out by the district nurse, I would have expected him to tell her that he had been called out to Mr Wilcockson that morning, if such had been the case. Looking at the evidence overall, I incline to the view that Shipman made an unsolicited visit and did not tell anyone why he had called. I regard that as suspicious.
Mr Wilcockson's bandage had been partially removed from his ulcerated leg. On seeing this, the family thought that he must have been preparing for the nurse's visit when he had a heart attack and died. However, there is another plausible explanation. It is quite possible that, when Shipman arrived, he asked Mr Wilcockson how he was. The answer would probably have been that he was not too bad except for his leg, which was very painful. Shipman might well have suggested that he should look at the ulcer and that he would give an injection to relieve the pain. Shipman might well have removed the bandage, looked at the ulcer and then replaced the bandage loosely. He could then have given a substantial dose of diamorphine, sufficient to kill Mr Wilcockson. Mr Wilcockson's appearance in death was entirely typical of that seen in so many of Shipman's victims who have been killed by diamorphine injection. It was not typical of that seen following a sudden cardiac death.
Form B contains a series of lies and half-truths typical of cases in which Shipman has killed. By stating that he was in attendance two hours before the death, Shipman appears to be trying to create the impression that he was sufficiently well informed to state the cause of death with confidence. By fixing his time of arrival earlier than it probably was, I think Shipman was seeking to distance himself from the death.
Taking all these factors into account, I have been driven to the conclusion that Shipman killed Mr Wilcockson. Despite the lack of medical and surgery records, which would usually make certainty impossible, I do feel confident that my conclusion must be right. I consider the possibility that this was a natural death so unlikely that I can properly discount it, notwithstanding Mr Wilcockson's advanced age. I am sure that Shipman killed Mr Wilcockson.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001