The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Winterbottom
Introduction
Mrs Mary Winterbottom died at her home, 181 Grange Road South, Hyde on Friday, 21st
September 1984 at the age of 76. She had been registered at the Donneybrook Surgery for many years, and had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. She and all her family held Shipman in high esteem. He certified that the cause of Mrs Winterbottom's death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In October 1998, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's arrest, Mrs Irene Bickerdyke, Mrs Winterbottom's daughter, contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances of her mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Bickerdyke, Mr Anthony Bickerdyke (Mrs Bickerdyke's husband), Mrs Freda Fenton (Mrs Winterbottom's friend and neighbour) and Mrs Norma Miles and Mrs Carol Chapman (Mrs Winterbottom's nieces).
Shipman was not prosecuted in connection with Mrs Winterbottom's death but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Bickerdyke. Mrs Winterbottom's medical records are no longer in existence. The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1984.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Winterbottom was a widow and lived alone. Mrs Bickerdyke describes her mother as 'very easygoing and friendly' and says that she was 'just a nice person.' They spoke every day on the telephone and met at weekends. Mrs Winterbottom's niece, Mrs Norma Miles, lived close by.
Mrs Winterbottom suffered from arthritis which, according to Mrs Miles, had been worsening over recent months and weeks. Mrs Bickerdyke recalls that Mrs Winterbottom also had angina and occasionally used a tablet under her tongue to deal with the chest pain.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
Mrs Bickerdyke said that, on Monday, 17th
September, her mother told her that she thought she 'had a bit of flu coming on'. Mrs Bickerdyke understood that Shipman visited Mrs Winterbottom at home, prescribed some medication and said that he would return on Friday, 21st
September. Shipman's visits book confirms that he visited on 17th
September, but also suggests that he visited on Saturday, 15th
September. A note against Mrs Winterbottom's name suggests that she might have pleurisy. It may therefore be that Mrs Winterbottom's illness had begun a little sooner than Mrs Bickerdyke recalls.
On the evening of Wednesday, 19th
September, Mrs Bickerdyke dropped off some shopping at her mother's house and recalls that her mother appeared to be quite well. Certainly she was not seriously ill. Mrs Bickerdyke cannot now recall whether she spoke to her mother on the following day.
The Day of the Death
At about 9am on Friday, 21st
September, Mrs Fenton, a close friend and neighbour, visited Mrs Winterbottom and together they compiled a shopping list of items that Mrs Fenton would collect for Mrs Winterbottom. At that time, Mrs Winterbottom was wearing a nightdress and dressing gown. Mrs Fenton recalls that Mrs Winterbottom was short of breath but was otherwise in good spirits. They shared a laugh and a joke. In her statement to the police, Mrs Fenton said that Mrs Winterbottom was expecting a visit from Shipman that day. That was the last time Mrs Fenton saw Mrs Winterbottom alive.
Mrs Miles believes that she visited Mrs Winterbottom some time during the day on 21st
September. At the very latest, it would have been before leaving to collect her son from school at 2.55pm. Mrs Bickerdyke telephoned her mother at about 3pm-3.30pm. Mrs Winterbottom told her that she was feeling a lot better and was waiting for the doctor to arrive. They then made arrangements to meet the following day.
Mr and Mrs Bickerdyke say that it was Mrs Winterbottom's normal practice to leave the front door to her flat unlocked. When expecting a visitor, she would leave the front door open. Mrs Bickerdyke believes her mother would have left the door on the latch for Shipman to let himself in.
Shipman's visits book for 21st
September contains Mrs Winterbottom's name, as would be expected. He had promised to revisit on that day.
Soon after 3.30pm, Mrs Miles returned home after collecting her son from school. Mr Stan Graham, a neighbour, approached her and told her that Shipman was at Mrs Winterbottom's flat. Mrs Miles went over and was met by Shipman, who said that he had come to see Mrs Winterbottom, 'but he was sorry but she had died'. He took hold of Mrs Miles' arm and she recalls that he asked whether she would like to see her aunt. She also recalls Shipman saying something about having to take Mrs Winterbottom's teeth out and, when she saw her aunt, Mrs Winterbottom's teeth were not in. Mrs Miles made arrangements to contact Mr Bickerdyke and awaited his arrival.
At about 3.45pm, Mr Bickerdyke received a telephone call from Shipman. He recalls that Shipman said that he had some bad news; his mother-in-law had just died. Mr Bickerdyke told Shipman that he would come to the house straight away, to which Shipman replied, 'You don't have to rush, she has already died'. Mr Bickerdyke went to the flat, where he saw Mrs Winterbottom lying on her bed. Shipman had gone. Mr Bickerdyke then returned home to inform his wife of her mother's death.
Mrs Bickerdyke, who visited as soon as she came home from work, describes seeing her mother lying in her day clothes on top of her bed. The bed was made up and everything was quite tidy. Mrs Bickerdyke thought it unusual that her mother should be on the bed during the day, as her practice was to sit in her chair or settee if she was in need of rest.
The Aftermath
Members of Mrs Winterbottom's family were very shocked at the suddenness of her death. After the funeral, Shipman told Mrs Bickerdyke that Mrs Winterbottom had died of a heart attack and that she would not have been in any pain at the time of her death; she would simply have lain down and gone to sleep. Mrs Bickerdyke does not remember Shipman having claimed to have attempted resuscitation. On thinking back to her mother's appearance in death, it did not appear to her as though anyone had tried resuscitation.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. This shows that Shipman certified that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. He said that he had last seen Mrs Winterbottom alive on 18th
September 1984.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that Mrs Winterbottom died at
'Approx 15.45 hours'
. That must have been about right. He also stated that he last saw Mrs Winterbottom alive two days before her death. That would be on Wednesday, 19th
September, and is not what he put on the MCCD. It also differs from the visits book and Mrs Bickerdyke's recollection, which was that Shipman had last seen her mother alive on Monday, 17th
September. These differences are unimportant. In any event, Shipman was saying that he had not seen Mrs Winterbottom alive on the day of her death. He said that he saw her body immediately after death. To some extent, this is consistent with what the family believed, as it appears that Shipman had either said or at least implied that he had found Mrs Winterbottom dead when he arrived at her flat.
On Form B, the cause of death was as stated on the MCCD counterfoil and the mode of death was said to be collapse of only minutes' duration. When asked whether his answers to the questions relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others, Shipman wrote:
'own: Found collapsed on bed
attempted resuscitation failed
Seen by Niece 2 hours previous quite
well. Known IHD
(
ischaemic heart disease
)
15 yrs
'.
Finally, on Form B, Shipman stated that he was present at the moment of death. Putting these various answers together, it appears that Shipman must have arrived at the very moment of death. He seems not to have seen Mrs Winterbottom alive that day, but was there in time to know that the episode leading to death lasted only a matter of minutes, and soon enough to attempt resuscitation. However, he seems not to have been there in time to make it worthwhile summoning an ambulance. This account seems to me to create a wholly improbable picture. I think it seeks to give the impression that this was a sudden, but not unexpected, death for which there was a wholly plausible explanation.
Conclusion
There are some suspicious features surrounding this death. First, it appears that Shipman was present at the moment of death. That in itself arouses grave suspicion, as other doctors find that patients very rarely die during the course of a routine visit. This visit seems to have been little more than that. It was certainly not an emergency visit.
It is possible that this was a natural death from coronary thrombosis. It is clear that Mrs Winterbottom did have angina and, in the absence of the medical records, I cannot assess the severity of her heart disease. She may well have had ischaemic heart disease for 15 years as Shipman claimed although, if she did, it does not seem to have affected her activities until quite shortly before her death. People with angina or ischaemic heart disease can and do die sudden deaths. So a sudden cardiac death is a real possibility in this case.
If this was a natural death, the hand of coincidence played an extraordinary role. If it occurred in the manner claimed by Shipman, Mrs Winterbottom succumbed just at the moment when he walked through the door. Such an event could happen, although it is very unlikely. If Shipman is to be believed, in this and other cases, deaths quite frequently occurred just at the time of his visit. I cannot but be deeply sceptical of his claim that Mrs Winterbottom was having a heart attack just as he arrived.
I also doubt that Shipman attempted resuscitation. Effective resuscitation must be carried out on a hard surface. A soft bed would not be satisfactory. The clothing did not appear to be disturbed. Although the dentures could have been removed to facilitate resuscitation, Shipman might have removed them to create the impression he had tried to revive Mrs Winterbottom. But her otherwise tidy appearance belies any serious attempt.
Another factor of some concern is that Shipman claimed that Mrs Winterbottom would simply have lain down and gone to sleep. Such a mode of death would not be typical of death by coronary thrombosis. Usually, a fatal heart attack is a very painful event, although occasionally it is not. However, I do not attach much weight to this factor, as Shipman might have offered this explanation, knowing it to be untrue, but wishing to reassure an anxious relative.
The appearance of the body, lying neatly on the bed, fully clothed, is not typical of a patient who has suffered a heart attack. Usually such a patient is found collapsed on the floor having made an effort to seek help. On the other hand, Mrs Winterbottom's position and appearance is typical of the deaths of many of Shipman's victims from morphine poisoning.
Taking these factors into account, it seems overwhelmingly likely that Shipman killed Mrs Winterbottom by giving her an injection, almost certainly of diamorphine. I say that even in the absence of Mrs Winterbottom's medical records, which, if available, whould have enabled me to assess more accurately the seriousness of her heart condition. Shipman's account of events is wholly implausible. I am sure Shipman unlawfully killed Mrs Winterbottom.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001