The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mona Ashton White
Introduction
Miss Mona Ashton White died at her home, 18 Thorpe Hall Grove, Newton, Hyde on Monday, 15th
September 1986 at the age of 63. She had never married. She lived in a ground floor flat. The flat had an alarm by which a warden could be summoned if needed. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and held him in high regard. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's conviction, Miss White's younger sister, Mrs Alison Forder, spoke to the police of her concerns about the manner in which her sister had died. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Forder and from two home helps, Mrs Elizabeth Christina Shawcross and Mrs Dorothy Foley. Shipman was not prosecuted for causing Miss White's death but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Forder, Mrs Shawcross and Mrs Foley. Miss White's medical records have not survived but the Inquiry has obtained Shipman's visits book for 1986.
This decision was made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Forder had been close to her elder sister. She was aware that Miss White had arthritis in the neck but believed her to be in good health in other respects. Because of the arthritis, Miss White had a home help to assist with the heavier housework but, in other respects, she looked after herself and did not need daily visits. In fact, two home helps, Mrs Shawcross and Mrs Foley, who worked together as a team, both worked for Miss White. They recalled that Miss White was sometimes breathless with angina in addition to having problems with her arthritis.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Forder called on her sister on the morning of 15th
September 1986. Miss White appeared well. The two sisters chatted and had a laugh together. During the course of the conversation, Miss White mentioned that she had telephoned Shipman as she wanted a repeat prescription for her arthritis medication and that he would be calling later that day.
Shipman's intention to visit Miss White is recorded in his visits book. He had visited her previously on Wednesday, 10th
September. Mrs Forder was surprised the doctor was calling because Miss White was not ill. She left her sister at about 10.45am. Her lasting memory is of her sister smiling as she waved goodbye.
At about midday, the two home helps saw Miss White standing at her front door. She was concerned because Shipman had not arrived. They reassured her that the doctor would arrive soon and went on their way. Mrs Shawcross recalls that Miss White said she was not feeling well, but she did not look ill. Had she seemed ill, the home helps would not have left her alone to wait.
Some time later (perhaps 20 minutes or so according to her Inquiry statement or at about 1pm according to what she told the police), Mrs Shawcross was on Thorpe Hall Grove when she saw Shipman standing at the boot of his car, close to Miss White's house. Mrs Shawcross went over to Shipman and asked him whether Miss White's problem was with her heart. Shipman replied, 'Yes dear, I have just given her a little injection for the pain.'
Mrs Shawcross then left Shipman and went to another client. About 20 minutes later, she returned to Miss White's flat. She found the door unlocked. She went inside, into the lounge, and found Miss White sitting upright in her usual chair. She looked as though she was sleeping. Her clothing was not disturbed. Mrs Shawcross tried to wake her but Miss White did not respond. Mrs Shawcross realised that she was dead. She could not understand what had happened. She ran to Mrs Foley's house, which was nearby on Highfield Close. It is Mrs Foley's recollection that only 10-15 minutes had elapsed between her seeing Miss White alive and Mrs Shawcross coming to her door.
The two home helps returned to Miss White's flat, by which time Shipman had returned. He said, 'She's just died.' He had put the kettle on for a cup of tea. Then he asked one of the home helps to telephone Mrs Forder. Mrs Forder recalls that at about 12.45pm, she received a telephone call from one of the home helps who said that Shipman had asked her to telephone Mrs Forder to say that Miss White had had a heart attack and that he would stay with her as she was slipping away. Mrs Forder and her husband arrived at about 12.55pm. The two home helps were very upset. Shipman was ready to leave. He told Mrs Forder that he had come to see Miss White and she had had a massive heart attack and that he knew she was going to die. He had sat with her until she died, just before Mrs Forder's arrival. He said it would have been no use sending for an ambulance. He said there was no need for a post-mortem examination as he knew Miss White's medical history and had been with her. He said he would sort out the paperwork. He advised them to call a funeral director and then left. The home helps recall that Shipman had made no attempt at resuscitation while they were there and Miss White's clothing appeared undisturbed.
The Aftermath
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found and shows that Shipman wrote that he had last seen Miss White alive on the day of her death. The cause of death was said to be coronary thrombosis.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that the death occurred at 1pm, which might be correct, although the death could have taken place a little earlier than that. He said that he had attended Miss White for half an hour during her final illness, which must presumably have been a reference to the fatal coronary thrombosis. He said that he saw Miss White half an hour before her death and immediately after her death, when he performed a complete external examination. He said that the mode of death was a coma of half an hour's duration. His answers to the questions relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations. He said that he and
'Home Help'
were present at the time of death.
Professor Richard Baker considered the case highly suspicious on the basis of Form B.
Conclusion
This death occurred during the brief period of a visit by Shipman, very shortly after Miss White was seen by witnesses to be in apparently normal health. That, in itself, is a factor which gives rise to grave suspicion.
According to Shipman's account, as derived from Form B, he arrived at 12.30pm. When he arrived, Miss White was suffering a heart attack and was lapsing into a coma. She lay in a coma for half an hour, during which time a home help arrived. Miss White died at about 1pm. I accept, of course, that people can and do have heart attacks and die very suddenly. However, for that to happen as the doctor arrives is a remarkable coincidence, especially when the patient was reasonably well shortly before, as Miss White was, according to both her home helps.
Quite apart from that coincidence, Shipman's conduct that day is not consistent with what would be expected of a doctor who found a 63 year old patient suffering a heart attack. The first thing a reasonable doctor would have done would be to call an ambulance. The patient would have required urgent treatment in hospital. No doctor would have known that the thrombosis was inevitably going to be fatal. If the patient were in severe pain, it would be reasonable to give her a small dose of opiate. If she went into cardiac arrest, the doctor should have attempted resuscitation until the paramedics arrived. It appears that Shipman did not call for an ambulance or attempt resuscitation. It appears that he gave Miss White an injection of something to relieve the pain and left her. When Mrs Shawcross arrived at the house at about 12.40pm, Miss White was alone and apparently dead. Mrs Shawcross went to find Mrs Foley, and when they returned together, Shipman had come back. He immediately told them that Miss White was dead. The telephone call was then made to Mrs Forder in which, on Shipman's instruction, Miss White was described as 'slipping away', in other words not yet dead. I am satisfied that was not true. When Mrs Forder arrived about ten minutes later, Shipman told her that Miss White had only just died. I am satisfied that that was not true. She had probably been dead for about half an hour.
On Form B, Shipman falsely claimed that a home help had been present at the moment of death. If, as Shipman appears to have suggested, Miss White died after the two home helps had returned, then both were present at the death. If she died before the two returned, then neither was present at the death, as it could not be said that Mrs Shawcross was present at the death when she went in alone and found Miss White. Shipman's false claim that another person beside himself was present at the death was the kind of lie that he was wont to tell. There are many cases in which he has sought to suggest that another person was present at the death when in truth he was there alone. I am satisfied that the contents of Form B were designed to present a plausible account of the death, which would not arouse suspicions. In my view, when Shipman gave Miss White an injection, it is far more likely that it was intended to bring about her death than it was to ease her pain.
Miss White's appearance after death, sitting upright in her chair, was not typical of a death from coronary thrombosis but was entirely typical of death by morphine injection.
Despite the absence of medical records, I am sure that Shipman killed Miss White.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001