The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Marjorie Hope Waller
Introduction
Mrs Marjorie Hope Waller died at her home, 4 Kew Avenue, Hyde on Thursday, 18th
April 1996 at the age of 79. She was a widow and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She held him in high regard. She told friends she thought he was 'absolutely marvellous'. He certified that the cause of death was bronchopneumonia due to chronic obstructive pulmonary heart disease.
The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs Waller's death was one of a number recovered by the police from the register office in October 1988, and after a preliminary assessment it was decided that enquiries should be made into the death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Waller's friends, Mrs Jean Marjorie Thompson and Mr Glyn Christopher Jones, and her neighbour Mr Jack Hampson. The police also took statements from Dr Raj Patel and Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Waller but an inquest was held on 1st
March 2001, at which the South Manchester Coroner recorded an open verdict.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mrs Thompson, Mr Hampson and Mr Jones together with a statement from Mr Hampson's wife, Mrs Doris Hampson. Mrs Thompson, Mr and Mrs Hampson and Mr Jones gave oral evidence at a hearing on 6th
July 2001. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Waller's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry obtained additional evidence from Dr Grenville who also gave oral evidence at the hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Waller's daughter died in her twenties from leukaemia and she had been estranged from her son for some years before her death. However, she had many friends and led a very active life. She was particularly interested in training and showing dogs. She was also very keen on knitting, sewing and embroidery.
All four witnesses said that, until shortly before her death, Mrs Waller had been extremely fit. She walked her three dogs every day, usually on Werneth Low, which is an open area of parkland outside Hyde. This is a hilly area and the fact that Mrs Waller could walk her dogs there is convincing evidence of her fitness.
Mrs Waller's medical records confirm that she was generally fit. The computerised records show that she had some aches and pains due to osteoarthritis. In July 1995, Shipman diagnosed her as suffering from chronic obstructive airways disease. The signs and symptoms leading to this diagnosis are not recorded but some support for it is to be found in two peak flow lung function readings, taken in early 1996, which are probably on the low side. Mrs Waller was not referred to hospital for full lung function tests as would have been appropriate if Shipman had suspected a serious respiratory condition. Dr Grenville expressed the view that Mrs Waller's reported level of activity and the entries in the medical records would support a diagnosis of very mild chronic obstructive airways disease at most.
The Events of the Weeks Leading up to Death
About two weeks before her death, Mrs Waller developed a cold with catarrh, which seemed to settle on her chest. She attended Shipman's surgery on 10th
April. The entry for that day records that she was suffering from
'Acute bronchitis'
,
although no record was made of the signs or symptoms on which the diagnosis was based. Apparently Mrs Waller was prescribed ofloxacin, an antibiotic, and Alupent, a broncho-dilator. She attended the surgery again on 16th April, at which time she was given a repeat prescription for Alupent. The records state that she was very anxious.
Mrs Waller told her friends that she had seen Shipman and that he had 'grounded' her, instructing her to stay indoors and not to walk her dogs. Whether that was at the first or second consultation is not clear. She arranged for the youngest and most demanding of her three dogs to be cared for by Mr Thompson. Mr Hampson recalls that, about three days prior to her death, Mrs Waller told him that she was going to see Shipman that day as her chest was bad. After the hearing, Mr Hampson was able to produce a document from which he was able to say with some certainty that this conversation took place on 16th
April. On 17th
April, Mrs Thompson did some shopping for Mrs Waller and took it round in the afternoon. She found Mrs Waller unwell and still chesty. However, she was fully dressed and was preparing her evening meal, which was to consist of a pork chop, potatoes and vegetables. Mrs Thompson was not unduly concerned about her friend's welfare.
The Day of the Death
The following morning, 18th April, Mrs Thompson telephoned Mrs Waller and found that she sounded much brighter. It was agreed that Mrs Thompson would visit her the following day.
Just before lunchtime, Mrs Hampson saw Mrs Waller at her front door. She thinks she was putting out her milk bottles. She was dressed in day clothes.
At about 1pm (the exact time is not clear from the witnesses' recollections), Mr Hampson noticed Shipman's car outside Mrs Waller's bungalow. He was not surprised and resolved to go across in a short while to see how she was. He and his wife had lunch. When they had finished, he was about to go over to Mrs Waller's house when he saw Mr Jones' car outside her bungalow. Knowing Mr Jones was a good friend of Mrs Waller, he decided to wait a while. Very shortly afterwards, Mr Jones rang at the door and asked Mr Hampson to go across to Mrs Waller's bungalow, because he thought Mrs Waller had died.
Mr Jones had had lunch at the home of Mrs Thompson and afterwards had decided to drive over to Mrs Waller's house to see how she was. He thinks he arrived at about 2pm. He knocked on the porch door and, having received no reply, tried the door and found it to be unlocked. That was most surprising, as Mrs Waller was known to be extremely security conscious. He was even more surprised when he found the inner door unlocked. Both doors were always kept locked by Chubb keys. He entered the house and called for Mrs Waller but there was no response. He eventually found Mrs Waller lying on her bed fully dressed in her day clothes. It was obvious to him that she had died. He went across to see Mr Hampson and told him that he thought Mrs Waller had died. The two men returned to Mrs Waller's house. Mr Jones' recollection is that Mr Hampson told him that Shipman had only just left Mrs Waller's house about ten minutes earlier. However, Mr Hampson thinks that a longer time had elapsed. His evidence is that anything up to one hour had passed since he had seen the doctor's car outside. The difference is not important. From a consideration of the list of Shipman's appointments for that day as shown in the surgery records, it seems unlikely that he could have begun his visits until about 12.45pm. Whether he went to Mrs Waller's house first will never be known. It is clear that he did visit her house but I cannot say exactly at what time. The most likely time seems to be about 1pm.
Mr Jones telephoned Shipman's surgery to ask him to return. His recollection is that he was told that Shipman had gone to Manchester but the receptionist would contact him and ask him to attend. Mr Jones also telephoned Mrs Thompson, who immediately drove to Mrs Waller's house. She believes that she arrived between 2.30pm and 2.45pm. She found Mrs Waller lying on the bed, fully dressed and wearing shoes, with her head on the pillow but with her legs partly off the bed and hanging down the side. She recalls removing Mrs Waller's glasses from her face and placing them on the bedside cabinet. Her impression was that Mrs Waller still felt warm.
After some time, Shipman arrived. Mrs Thompson says that he did not feel for a pulse, use a stethoscope or examine Mrs Waller's body. He told those present that Mrs Waller 'was a very sick person' and that he had attempted to persuade her to be admitted to hospital but she had refused. Both Mrs Thompson and Mr Jones say that they were surprised by this remark and that Mrs Waller had made no mention to them of even the possibility of going into hospital. Mr Hampson told the Inquiry that Mrs Waller had told him that, about three days before her death, Shipman had spoken to her about 'going away'. Mr Hampson did not know whether this was intended to mean that she was to go into hospital or whether Shipman had been suggesting that she would have to consider going into residential care. He said that Mrs Waller had said she could not do so because of her three dogs.
On either 16th
or 17th
April 1996, Mrs Waller had asked Mrs Thompson to withdraw money on her behalf from the Halifax Building Society in Hyde. To the best of Mrs Thompson's recollection, the sum withdrawn was £60 or £70. She gave the money to Mrs Waller on the same day. Following Mrs Waller's death, Mrs Thompson was unable to find the money, which she thought would have been in Mrs Waller's handbag.
The medical records for the day of the death are extremely brief. The first entry says only:
'Bronchopneumonia due to unspecified organism
refuses hospital review morne
(
sic
)
'
.
The second entry says:
'O/E - dead
1500 hrs on bed friends'
.
Shipman's visits book suggests that he intended to revisit that day. It also suggests that her daughter telephoned. The likelihood is that this is a reference to a telephone call from Mrs Thompson, who told the police that she regarded Mrs Waller as her 'adopted mother'.
Certification
Shipman signed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), saying that death was due to bronchopneumonia of two to three days' duration and that this was due to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease of three years' duration. He stated that he had seen the deceased alive on the day of her death.
He also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He recorded that Mrs Waller died at about 3pm on 18th
April 1996. He said that he last saw her alive about two hours before her death, which would have been at about 1pm. He said he had seen her body about one hour after death and had carried out a complete external examination. The witnesses say that he did not. The cause of death is stated to be bronchopneumonia. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is cited as a morbid condition contributing to death but not related to the immediate cause. Thus he expressed the role of the chronic pulmonary disease as different from the role he attributed to it on the MCCD. The mode of death is stated to be collapse lasting
'minutes only'
. However, as he also said that no one was present at the moment of death, this statement must have been supposition. In response to question 11, which asks how far the answers to the questions about the cause and mode of death are the result of his own observations or are based on the statements of others, Shipman did not answer the question directly but wrote:
'Found by neighbours dead on the bed. When returning with prescription'
. The witnesses say that they had not returned to Mrs Waller's house with a prescription and had never said that they had. I am quite satisfied that this entry is a deliberate fabrication by Shipman, designed to make it appear that a neighbour had seen Mrs Waller alive and had picked up the prescription after Shipman had left the house. In fact, no one had seen her or spoken to her after his departure.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker regarded this death as highly suspicious on the basis of his examination of the medical records and from examining the cremation forms.
Dr Grenville examined the records and gave evidence at the inquest. Since then, he has reconsidered the case in the light of all the evidence and gave evidence at an Inquiry hearing. He has now expressed a firm view that he does not believe that Mrs Waller was suffering from bronchopneumonia at the time of her death. He explained that a person dying from that condition is very obviously ill for at least several hours before death. Breathing is rapid, possibly shallow and sounds rattly. If Mrs Waller had bronchopneumonia on 18th
April, she would not have eaten a substantial meal on the previous evening and would not have been up and dressed that morning. Dr Grenville considers that the symptoms Mrs Waller described to Mrs Thompson sound more like a fairly mild respiratory tract infection. He observes that Shipman has not recorded any signs or symptoms to support the diagnosis of acute bronchitis on 10th
April. I observe that he has not recorded any signs or symptoms to support the diagnosis of bronchopneumonia. I also observe that bronchopneumonia is a very serious condition and no doctor would ever accept the patient's unwillingness to be admitted to hospital and just leave the patient without arrangements being made for his or her care and treatment. In other words, Shipman's entry in the medical record does not make sense.
Dr Grenville also considered the possibility that Mrs Waller might have died a sudden death from a heart attack, stroke, pulmonary embolus or ruptured aortic aneurysm. As he observes, there is no evidence in the medical records that she was at an increased risk of suffering any of these conditions. If she had died from such a cause, the death would have been wholly unrelated to her chest infection. Death from any of those causes within a very short time of Shipman's departure would have been a quite extraordinary coincidence. The death should have been reported to the coroner.
Dr Grenville also expressed the view that the position in which Mrs Waller was found was inconsistent with death due to bronchopneumonia, which is usually preceded by a period of exhaustion or coma. Nor was her appearance in death typical of what is usually seen following a sudden death from a cardiac or cerebrovascular cause. It was consistent with death following a lethal injection of opiates.
Conclusion
I do not accept that Mrs Waller had bronchopneumonia on 18th
April. If she had, she would not have eaten a healthy meal the evening before. If she had, it would have been obvious to Mrs Thompson that morning that her friend was seriously ill. I accept Mrs Thompson's evidence that Mrs Waller sounded brighter and said that she was feeling better. I am satisfied that Mrs Waller had only a fairly mild respiratory tract infection. It follows that Shipman's first entry in Mrs Waller's records for the day of the death was fabricated.
I also feel able to reject as fanciful the possibility that Mrs Waller died suddenly of a heart condition or stroke in the short period after Shipman had visited and before Mr Jones arrived. She had no medical history that would predispose her to such an event. Also, for the death to occur in that short window of opportunity would be a most remarkable coincidence.
Shipman's account of the death, as inferred from the medical records and the content of Form B, does not make sense for the reasons I have set out above. He recorded no signs and symptoms to support his diagnosis of severe illness. He did not behave as any reasonable doctor would have behaved if faced with a severely ill patient refusing to go to hospital. I observe that for Shipman to say that a patient had refused hospital admission was a typical feature of the murder cases.
Shipman fabricated several entries on Form B. Most important is the implication that someone had picked up the prescription he had given her. This was plainly designed to make it appear that someone else had seen Mrs Waller alive since his visit to her at about 1pm. He also stated that the death had occurred later than it really did, no doubt to add plausibility to this suggestion and to distance himself from the death. His assertion that he had attended Mrs Waller for seven days during her last illness is inconsistent with the contents of the medical records, which give no indication that Mrs Waller was suffering from a 'last illness' until the day of her death.
If Mrs Waller was alive and walking about the house when Shipman left, the unlocked doors would be a mystery. I accept the evidence of her friends that she was very conscious of security and would have locked the door behind Shipman if she had been able to show him out. Of course, if she was already dead, as I believe she was, Shipman would have had to let himself out and would have been unable to lock the Chubb-type locks which secured both the inner and outer doors.
I have come to the conclusion that there is only one explanation which will fit all the facts of this case. That is that Shipman killed Mrs Waller by giving her a lethal injection of diamorphine or other strong opiate. I am sure that he did so.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001