The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Harry Waller
Introduction
Mr Harry Waller died at his home, 4 Kew Avenue, Hyde on Tuesday, 25th
October 1988 at the age of 69. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and thought highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the left main bronchus.
In February 2000, Mr Waller's son described the circumstances of his father's death to an officer from the Greater Manchester Police who was investigating the death of Mr Waller's wife, Mrs Marjorie Hope Waller. Mrs Waller's death was the subject of a coroner's inquest in 2001, when an open verdict was returned. Her death has also been investigated by the Inquiry. Although the police compiled a report of Mr Waller's son's account of his father's death, they did not formally investigate the death.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Waller's son and in addition has received a number of electronic mail messages from him. The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Waller's hospital records, to Shipman's visits book for 1988 and to the duty doctor transfer book recovered from the Donneybrook Surgery. The general practitioner records have not survived. Nor has it been possible to recover the records of prescriptions issued by Shipman for Mr Waller in the period before his death. The Inquiry has, however, obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been made following a review of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Over the summer of 1988, Mr Waller's health deteriorated and he lost a significant amount of weight. He was short of breath and he began to cough up phlegm and small amounts of blood. He was referred to Tameside General Hospital and a bronchoscopy was performed on 24th
June 1988. The examination did not reveal the presence of a carcinoma. About three months later, in September 1988, investigations revealed a tumour in the left main bronchus. Mr Waller was referred to the Christie Hospital, Manchester. He attended on 5th
October 1988 and the records show that he was told the nature of his condition and that it was not treatable. Shipman was also informed. At the time of that attendance, Mr Waller was not in pain but he was prescribed methadone linctus, a strong opiate, as it appears that the doctor thought that it would not be long before he needed it. Mr R Stout, the consultant in radiotherapy and oncology at the Christie Hospital, wrote to Dr M P Chopra, the consultant physician at Tameside General Hospital, on 11th
October 1988, informing him that x-ray treatment would not assist Mr Waller and recorded that he had discussed
'further symptomatic measures with Dr Shipman'
.
Mr Waller's son moved to Leeds from the south of England in September 1988 and was thereafter able to visit his father more regularly. By this time, Mr Waller was very unwell and his son visited virtually every other day. Mr Waller's son thinks that he was told of the diagnosis of lung cancer on a Monday, which was probably 26th
September. Mr Waller's son says that, at that time, his father was experiencing pain and required painkillers. He also appeared confused and very unwell. On a visit at about this time, Shipman explained to Mr Waller's son that his father's confused state was due to the amount of medication he was taking.
Shipman's visits book shows that he visited Mr Waller very often between late September and late October 1988.
The Events Leading up to Death
Mr Waller's son recalls that Shipman visited his father on Saturday, 22nd
October 1988 and administered an injection of diamorphine. That visit is recorded in Shipman's visits book. Mr Waller's son remembers his father getting out of bed in order to be ready for Shipman's visit. According to Mr Waller's son, Shipman did not examine Mr Waller immediately but instead had a private conversation with Mrs Waller for about ten minutes, after which he said that he thought Mr Waller should now be 'put to sleep'. According to Mr Waller's son, his father, who was able to understand the situation, said, 'No', presumably meaning that he did not want to be put to sleep. Shipman apparently injected him immediately, without allowing Mr Waller's son the opportunity to intervene. Following the injection, Mr Waller's son felt that he should trust Shipman's professional judgement and did not object to what had happened. In so doing, Mr Waller's son says he was respecting his mother's wishes and her belief that Shipman was acting in Mr Waller's best interests. Mr Waller's son does not suggest that, by putting his father to sleep, Shipman intended to kill him, rather that he should sedate him and render him unconscious.
Mr Waller's son describes Shipman administering the injection on 22nd
October in the following terms:
'Shipman took a drug out of his bag and injected my father in the buttock. He said words similar to, “trust me, this is what happens eventually to terminally ill patients.” He said that in an hour my father would be asleep'
.
Mr Waller's son remembers Shipman giving him a prescription for diamorphine on 22nd
October. He went to a particular pharmacy as instructed, signed a drugs register and brought the diamorphine back to the house and gave it to his mother. Mr Waller's son cannot recall specifically the quantity of diamorphine that he collected; however, he does remember that the packet he collected contained '10 or 12 capsules'.
Mr Waller's son recalls that Shipman visited his father on Sunday, 23rd
October. There is a record of the visit in Shipman's visits book. In his statement to the Inquiry, Mr Waller's son describes the visit of 23rd
October in the following terms:
'I asked him
(
Shipman
)
if my father could actually hear anything or not. Shipman walked over to my father's bed, put his knuckle on his sternum and moved it with some force. I was the only other person in the room at this time. My father awoke in pain and saw only me as I was close by and near to a window. From his expression, it was clear he thought I had hurt him. Shipman was on the other side of the bed in a darker part of the room and my father did not see him'
.
In an electronic mail message sent to the Inquiry on 24th
July 2001, Mr Waller's son added to that account in the following terms:
'Shipman had been with my father, accompanied by my mother, in the bedroom. Afterwards, knowing very little of medicine, I asked Shipman whether there was any chance that my father retained any awareness - and might perhaps hear what was spoken to him. Shipman said, “Follow me” or “Come with me” - and led me into the bedroom. My mother did not follow. Then Shipman did what I have described...'
.
When Mr Waller's son gave his account to the police, the officer recorded that, on the occasion I have just described, his father awoke screaming. Through his legal advisors, Mr Waller's son has said that that was not correct.
In his statement to the Inquiry, Mr Waller's son says that he now suspects that Shipman sedated his father 'too early'. In the electronic mail message dated 24th
July 2001, Mr Waller's son said that, at the time of the first injection on 22nd
October, his father was not in pain. Having heard the generic evidence given to the Inquiry by Professor Henry McQuay, Mr Waller's son has now raised the possibility that his father might have been given diamorphine via a syringe driver. However, he does not describe ever having seen a syringe driver.
Although Mr Waller's son has not said so, it appears that Shipman visited his father on Monday, 24th
October, as there is an entry in his visits book for that date. The visit was scheduled as Shipman's fifth on that day. This would indicate that it was a planned visit rather than a response to an urgent request and probably took place during the middle of the day, after morning surgery and before the late afternoon surgery.
The Day of the Death
Mr Waller's son has said that his father died at approximately 5.45am. Form A of the cremation certificate signed by Mrs Waller says that the death occurred at 6.15am. According to the account set out in a letter dated 28th
September 2001, from Mr Waller's son's legal advisors, Mrs Waller went into her son's room to say that his father had stopped breathing. Mr Waller's son went through into his parents' bedroom and found that his father had died. Shipman had previously said that Mrs Waller should telephone him any time, day or night, when Mr Waller died. They telephoned Shipman, who arrived within 45 minutes. Mr Waller's son says that Shipman examined his father and said, 'You won't have any problem with that'. Mr Waller's son did not understand what Shipman meant by those words.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not survived, although its counterfoil has been recovered. It is there recorded that Shipman last saw Mr Waller alive on 24th
October, the day before death, that he saw the body after death and that a post-mortem examination would not be held.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation forms. The time of death is recorded as
'0615hrs'
on 25th
October 1988. Shipman said that he had been Mr Waller's ordinary medical attendant for a period of 11 years and that he had attended him during his last illness for six months. He said he had last seen Mr Waller alive
'within 24 hours of death'
and saw the body about 30 minutes thereafter. The mode of death was said to be coma of 24 hours' duration. In answer to question 11 (as to whether the answers to the questions as to cause and mode of death had been given on the basis of his own observations or those of others), Shipman answered,
'own + wife's'
. Shipman said that Mr Waller had not undergone any operation within a year before death, although he referred to the bronchoscopy carried out in September 1988, at which the diagnosis of cancer had been confirmed. Shipman said that Mr Waller's wife and son were present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
On his consideration of the cremation forms, Professor Richard Baker concluded that the death of Mr Waller did not give rise to suspicion.
Dr Grenville has said that the description of Shipman's care of Mr Waller during his final illness is well within the bounds of reasonable practice. He said that it was not possible to say with certainty when Shipman last gave Mr Waller an injection of diamorphine. However, he drew an inference that Shipman last visited Mr Waller at least six hours prior to death and on that basis concluded that the last injection of diamorphine administered by Shipman was not the immediate cause of his death
.
As to a statistical analysis provided by Mr Waller's son, Dr Grenville commented as follows:
'I am not an expert in statistics and am not, therefore, in a position to comment in detail on the statistical analysis. I do note, however, that the witness bases his argument on my generic evidence about the likelihood of a patient dying during or immediately after a visit by a doctor. The evidence I gave that a doctor would be unlucky to see such an event once in a professional lifetime referred only to patients who were previously healthy, had no pre-existing diagnosis of a condition likely to cause their death, and had not requested a consultation with the doctor in relation to the onset of new symptoms which might suggest an illness which carried a risk of sudden and unexpected death. These criteria do not apply to Harry Waller'
.
Conclusion
It is clear to me that Mr Waller's death was due to natural causes, as certified by Shipman.
Mr Waller was terminally ill and, according to Dr Grenville, the treatment provided by Shipman was within the bounds of reasonable practice. I think it highly unlikely that a syringe driver was used. Such equipment is obvious and, if Mr Waller's son was staying in the house, I think it is almost inconceivable that he would not have been aware that his father was being treated in that way. In any event, syringe drivers were not in common use in community medicine in the 1980s.
It appears to me that Shipman's last visit probably occurred about 15 to 18 hours before Mr Waller died. Even if Shipman paid a second visit during the evening of 24th
October, Mr Waller survived for at least six to eight hours afterwards. The possibility that Shipman administered a lethal dose of opiate to Mr Waller can be excluded. We know from the joint report provided by Professor McQuay and Dr Grenville that, even if an opiate were to be injected intramuscularly, the maximal effect would occur within 30 to 60 minutes. Therefore if a lethal injection were to be administered, death would be expected to occur within one hour. It can safely be inferred that Shipman did not give Mr Waller a lethal injection of opiate.
Mr Waller's son has also expressed concern that his father might have been sedated more heavily and sooner than he should have been. Dr Grenville has explained, both in his generic evidence and in his report in this case, that it is not always easy to assess the best quantity of medication to give a terminally ill patient. He says that some doctors will err towards ensuring that the patient has as little as possible. Others will give larger amounts, so as to ensure that the patient is not in pain, even though this might mean that the patient is unconscious sooner than might otherwise be the case. Neither of these approaches is right or wrong. Both are acceptable practice, provided that the doctor makes a genuine attempt to give the dose that he or she thinks is best for the patient. It appears that, on 22nd
October, Shipman administered an intramuscular injection into Mr Waller's buttock, after explaining that the injection would send Mr Waller to sleep. We do not know what the injection was; it could have been an opiate or it could have been a sedative. That injection does indeed seem to have sent Mr Waller to sleep and it appears that he was not conscious for long periods after that time. Patients who are heavily sedated are at increased risk of developing bronchopneumonia, a common mechanism of death in the terminally ill. It is theoretically possible that Mr Waller's death was hastened slightly by the decision to sedate him as early as 22nd
October. However, as Shipman appears to have discussed this course of action with Mrs Waller, it seems highly likely that Shipman gave the advice that he did in good faith, believing it to be the best way of keeping Mr Waller comfortable and not intending it to be an indirect way of hastening his death.
I can understand why Mr Waller's son has felt some concern about his father's death now that it is known that Shipman has killed many of his patients by giving excessive doses of diamorphine. In some of those cases, the patient has been terminally ill and Shipman has given a lethal dose intended to hasten the death. In such cases, the death will have taken place within about an hour of the final injection. In this case there is no reason to fear that Mr Waller was given a lethal dose. He lived for at least six hours after the final injection, probably rather longer. I hope the concerns of Mr Waller's son have now been laid to rest.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001