The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
James Wood
Introduction
Mr James Wood died at his home, 27 Rydal Avenue, Hyde on Tuesday, 23rd
December 1986 at the age of 82. He had been a patient of Shipman for about nine years and thought highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Wood's death was old age.
In March 2000, Mr Wood's daughter-in-law, Mrs Annie Wood, was interviewed by the police in connection with the death of her friend, Mrs Norah Johnson, who was also a patient of Shipman. During the interview, Mrs Wood expressed concern about the circumstances surrounding her father-in-law's death. The police investigated Mr Wood's death and, on 29th
March 2000, took a statement from Mrs Wood.
An inquest into Mr Wood's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May, 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Wood. Mr Wood's medical records have not survived but the Inquiry has had access to the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), the cremation documentation and Shipman's visits book for 1986.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Wood, who was a widower, was cared for by his daughter-in-law, who lived nearby. They used to spend most days together, usually at her house. He suffered from arthritis in the legs and pernicious anaemia, for which he received monthly injections of iron at Shipman's surgery. According to Mrs Wood, Mr Wood was quite healthy despite these conditions and would walk into Hyde with her three or four times a week. Not long before his death, Mr Wood's arthritis seemed to worsen and he could not walk so far. From that time, he and Mrs Wood usually took a bus back home. Mr Wood remained mentally very alert.
In the week or so before his death, Mr Wood had a bout of chesty influenza. He was confined to his flat and was a little low in mood as a result. Although Mrs Wood cannot remember this, it would appear that Shipman visited Mr Wood on 10th, 17th and 18th December 1986. Mr Wood's name appears in Shipman's visits book on those days.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of 23rd
December, Mrs Wood was with her father-in-law as usual. She told the police that she had been at his flat that morning, although in her Inquiry statement she said that Mr Wood had been at her house. I think it far more likely that she was at Mr Wood's flat, as he was not yet fully recovered from his illness. On that day, he was feeling much better and ate a good lunch. He was in good spirits and looking forward to being out and about again. Shipman was due to visit that afternoon. At about 1.30pm, Mrs Wood took her father-in-law a pot of lemon tea and stayed until about 2pm. When she left, he was watching television and waiting for Shipman's visit.
Mrs Wood returned to her father-in-law's flat at 4pm and let herself in, opening the Yale lock with her key. She called out to her father-in-law but there was no answer. She found him sitting in his usual chair in the lounge. His head had fallen forward and his dentures had been dislodged. He was a 'funny yellow colour'. Mrs Wood touched his head and found it to be cold. He was dead. The television was still on and Mrs Wood noticed that Mr Wood had drunk about half the pot of tea that she had left for him.
Mrs Wood went to find a neighbour, who telephoned Shipman. Shipman arrived quite soon, at about 4.30pm. He did not examine Mr Wood. He just smiled and said something like, 'That's a nice way to go - I've only just left him and I took a blood sample'. When Mrs Wood made her police statement, she recalled that Shipman said that he had just given her father-in-law an injection. Mrs Wood recalls that Shipman took a piece of paper from the top of the radio and put it in his pocket. She thinks that it was a prescription, although she did not see it closely. Shipman then left. He had been in the room for only a few minutes.
The Aftermath
A few days later, when Mrs Wood was cleaning her father-in-law's flat, she found a letter under the cushion of his chair. The letter said something like, 'Annie, thanks for all you've done looking after me, Dad'. Mrs Wood does not know when the letter was written. She thinks that her father-in-law must have realised that he was getting old and wanted to write something for her to find after his death. She does not think that it was a suicide note. Mrs Wood gave the note to the police after telling them of the circumstances of her father-in-law's death. Unfortunately, the note has been mislaid.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been recovered. This shows that Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Wood's death was old age. Rheumatoid arthritis and pernicious anaemia had contributed to the death but were said not be related to the immediate cause of death. Shipman stated that he had last seen Mr Wood alive on the day of his death. He said he had seen the body after death and that there would be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that the death had occurred at
'About 1600 hrs'
on 23rd
December 1986. He said that he had attended Mr Wood during his last illness for two weeks. As the cause of death was as stated on the MCCD counterfoil, the 'last illness' must be intended as a reference to 'old age'; the other conditions mentioned as contributory causes had been present for a long time. In any event, neither of these conditions was said to be related to the cause of death. Shipman said that he had last seen Mr Wood alive about two or three hours before his death, which on his timing would have been between 1pm and 2pm. He said that he had seen the body about an hour after death and made a complete external examination of it. The mode of death was said to be syncope of seconds only in duration. In response to question 11, which asks whether the answers as to cause and mode of death were based on the doctor's own observations or on statements made by others, Shipman wrote:
'FOUND SAT IN CHAIR “WATCHING”
T.V. By DAUGHTER.
seen by me that day - all OK
Routine visit - '
.
Shipman said that no one had nursed Mr Wood during his last illness and that no one was present at the moment of death.
Conclusion
There are several highly suspicious factors relating to this death. First and most obvious, the death was discovered very shortly after a visit by Shipman. No one saw Mr Wood alive after Shipman's visit. That in itself is a highly suspicious factor. If Mr Wood did indeed die a natural death that afternoon, as Shipman would have us believe, it is a remarkable coincidence that he should do so very shortly after Shipman's departure.
On Form B, Shipman sought to suggest that the death occurred at 4pm and that this was two to three hours after his own visit. It is clear that this must have been an attempt by Shipman to distance himself from the death. If Mr Wood really did die a natural death some time during the afternoon, Shipman could not possibly have known at what time it had occurred. Dr John Grenville has explained that it is not possible in such circumstances to estimate the time of death accurately, although Shipman often pretended that he could do so. If Mrs Wood's recollection is right and Mr Wood's body was cold when she arrived at about 4pm, it would seem that the death could not have taken place as recently as 4pm. If Mrs Wood's recollection is right when she says that she did not leave her father-in-law until about 2pm, it can be seen that Shipman has tried to advance the time of his visit, which he suggests was between 1pm and 2pm. Here again, he must have been trying to distance himself from the death. These factors suggest that Shipman left Mr Wood dead, probably some time between 2pm and 3pm.
There is some evidence that Mr Wood had been unwell in the week or two before his death and had required Shipman's attention on several occasions. Mrs Wood's recollection was that he was almost better and had eaten a good lunch on the day of his death. Shipman's own entry on Form B suggests that Mr Wood was well when Shipman visited. It is of course always possible for an elderly person to die suddenly without any forewarning and without any previous medical history that could explain the death. When that occurs, an honest doctor will refer the case to the coroner for a post-mortem examination. He will not pass the death off as being due to old age. Dr Grenville has described the circumstances in which it is appropriate for a doctor to certify a death as due to old age. This will be where the elderly person has been ill for a significant period of time (usually weeks or months) and has become frail and weak. Death will be fully expected. In these circumstances it can be difficult to determine exactly which specific organ failure has caused the death and a diagnosis of old age is acceptable. A patient in such circumstances would necessarily have been receiving a high level of care from nurses, relatives or friends before death. If a frail elderly patient with multiple organ failure had not been receiving a high level of nursing care, the question would arise as to whether neglect had contributed to the death and it would be mandatory to report the death to the coroner. Mr Wood did not fall into this category of patient and the fact that Shipman certified the death as due to old age increases my suspicion that he killed Mr Wood.
Mr Wood's position and appearance in death were not typical of those usually seen in patients who have died following a heart attack or stroke or other common form of sudden death. On the other hand, they were entirely typical of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of opiate.
This case has the hallmark of a case in which Shipman killed. I am quite satisfied that Shipman killed Mr Wood during his visit on the afternoon of 23rd
December. It is highly likely that Shipman gave Mr Wood an injection of opiate either under the pretext of taking a blood sample or of giving him an injection which would be some form of appropriate treatment.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001