The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Margaret Anne Waldron
Introduction
Mrs Margaret Anne Waldron (known to her friends as Mags) died at her home, 2 Woodend Lane, Gee Cross, Hyde on Friday, 6th
March 1998 at the age of 65. She was a widow and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She had a high regard for him and recommended him to her friends. Her family called him 'Uncle Fred'. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis caused by ischaemic heart disease.
Mrs Waldron's death was brought to the attention of the police during the March 1998 investigation and it was, therefore, one of the first to be investigated in August 1998. The police took statements from Mrs Judith Kaye Lang and Mrs Sally Jane Freeman (Mrs Waldron's daughters), Mr David Anthony Wardley (Mrs Waldron's partner) and Mr Nigel Alan Fletcher (a gas engineer). The police also obtained statements from Dr John Grenville and Detective Sergeant John Ashley.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing Mrs Waldron's death but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Lang, Mrs Freeman, Mr Richard Balmer Freeman (Mrs Freeman's husband), Mr Wardley, Mr Neil David Harrop (a paramedic who attended after the death), Sister Gillian Morgan (practice nurse at the Market Street surgery), Mrs Moya Nagle and Mrs Sally Winton (two friends of Mrs Waldron) and Mrs Patricia Mathews (a medical representative who had an appointment with Shipman on the day of Mrs Waldron's death). Mrs Lang, Mrs Freeman, Mr Wardley and Mrs Winton gave oral evidence at a hearing on 10th
October 2001. Dr Grenville gave evidence about the death on 13th
November 2001. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Waldron's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also had access to telephone billing records, ambulance reports and records from British Gas.
Personal Background
Mrs Waldron was a state registered nurse who had retired from her post as matron of The Sycamores residential home three or four years prior to her death. She still had a part-time job at a retail outlet in the Hyde shopping mall on two days each week and led a full social life. Although she lived alone she saw her partner, Mr Wardley, every day and went on holidays and outings with him. The two kept separate homes.
Mrs Waldron's computerised medical records show that she had her appendix out in 1951, suffered rheumatic fever in 1956 and underwent a hysterectomy in 1967. In the 1970s, she suffered from recurrent pain in her abdomen and back, the cause of which was never identified. There were a number of respiratory problems, most seriously a bout of viral pneumonia in December 1993 and January 1994. She also suffered back pain from time to time for which she had physiotherapy in 1995. The last manual entry in Mrs Waldron's records is dated September 1996.
The most important point arising from Mrs Waldron's medical notes is that she had no history of heart problems and there is no record of any electrocardiogram (ECG) being carried out upon her. However, she was known to have hyperlipidaemia (raised blood fats) and her cholesterol levels were monitored from time to time. Mrs Waldron used to see the practice nurse and was given dietary advice designed to reduce her cholesterol level. The practice nurse reviewed her on 28th
January 1998. On that occasion, blood samples were taken and she was given a prescription, signed by the practice nurse, entitling her to the free use of the facilities at a gymnasium. She was to exercise in an attempt to lose weight. She signed on at the gymnasium and began to attend, usually twice weekly, with her partner. On 30th
January, when the results of the blood tests had been received, a prescription was issued for simvastatin tablets, authorised by the practice nurse. Simvastatin is a drug which lowers blood fats. Raised cholesterol levels give rise to an increased risk of heart disease and coronary thrombosis.
There is some uncertainty about whether Mrs Waldron ever received the prescription for simvastatin. Certainly, her family believes that she did not and that she was dissatisfied because she was not receiving medication for her condition. The Inquiry has obtained from the Prescription Pricing Authority all the prescriptions issued by Shipman (and subsequently cashed) between May 1997 and September 1998; the prescription of 30th
January is not among them. The family did not find any simvastatin at Mrs Waldron's home after her death. As 84 tablets should have been dispensed and should have been taken at the rate of one a day, there should have been about 50 left. This suggests that the prescription was never dispensed. It is possible that, by reason of some administrative error, Mrs Waldron was not told that a prescription had been made out and was available for collection. It is possible also that Shipman refused to sign the prescription, which had been authorised by Sister Morgan. That might account for the family's impression that Mrs Waldron was annoyed with Shipman because she thought she was not receiving proper treatment. However, a test carried out on 4th
March revealed that her cholesterol levels had fallen slightly, whether as the result of diet and exercise or from taking simvastatin is not known.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
The events of the week before Mrs Waldron's death can be gleaned from a letter, which she wrote to a friend, Mrs Margaret Burgess, and from the evidence of her daughters and partner. On Sunday, 1st
March, she began to suffer back pain and sciatica after picking her handbag up from the floor. On Monday, 2nd
March, she went to work but was in 'niggling' discomfort all day. She saw Mrs Lang after work. The letter reveals that, on the Tuesday, her back pain had worsened. She wrote of her intended 'visit to the doctor's 12.20pm to see the nurse re cholesterol.' She observed that she had 'a few questions for her!!'. The appointment appears in the practice nurse's diary.
Before her appointment on 4th
March, Mrs Waldron met Mrs Nagle in Hyde town centre. They went for a coffee and a chat, during which Mrs Waldron complained about her sciatica. According to Mrs Nagle, she told her that she was going to see 'Fred', as she called Shipman.
The entries in the computerised records for 4th
March 1998 show that Mrs Waldron was seen by the practice nurse. Sister Morgan took a blood sample, which was sent off to the laboratory. She wrote out a prescription for Voltarol (diclofenac) for Mrs Waldron's backache. Sister Morgan recalls taking this for Shipman to sign while Mrs Waldron waited. She arranged for Mrs Waldron to see her again on 25th
March. An audit trail of these entries shows that they were made one immediately after the other, just after 12.20pm. Sister Morgan is certain that she made all the relevant entries in the notes.
However, there is another entry dated 4th
March 1998, which reads:
'Referred to plastic surgeon'
. This entry was in fact made on 13th
March, after Mrs Waldron's death and at a time when the appointment with the plastic surgeon was cancelled. The original letter of referral is in Shipman's handwriting. It is possible therefore that the entry on the computer dated 4th
March, which was made on 13th
March, was made merely to put right the failure (an administrative oversight) to record the referral to the plastic surgeon at the time it was made. Sister Morgan is adamant that she did not discuss Mrs Waldron's facial mole with her on 4th
March and did not ask Shipman if Mrs Waldron could be referred. She points out that it is possible that the referral had been discussed at an earlier consultation with Shipman and the letter written later. However, according to the notes, Shipman had not seen Mrs Waldron since November 1997, when there is no mention of a mole in the note. Shipman was usually very prompt in referring patients to the hospital once he had decided to do so. There are two possible explanations for the referral to the plastic surgeon. One is that Mrs Waldron saw Shipman unofficially on 4th
March, and mentioned her mole and he agreed to refer her to the consultant. The other possibility is that, at some time after her death, Shipman wished to create a consultation with Mrs Waldron within 14 days of her death and so wrote a letter of referral, backdating it to 4th
March. This seems unlikely, as Mr Wardley has a vague recollection that Mrs Waldron told him that she had spoken to the doctor about her mole and that she was thinking of having it removed. I think, on balance, it is likely that Mrs Waldron saw Shipman very briefly while she was at the surgery on 4th
March. The practice staff say that Shipman sometimes held informal consultations with patients in the reception area, particularly at lunchtime. As Mrs Waldron's appointment was at 12.20pm, an informal meeting seems a real possibility. After her visit to the surgery, Mrs Waldron met Mrs Nagle again for lunch.
On Thursday, 5th
March, Mrs Waldron did not go to work because of her back pain. Mr Wardley last saw Mrs Waldron alive early that evening. She was in bed, which was unusual, and seemed in rather low spirits because of her leg and back pain. She thought that she had sciatica, although Mr Wardley suspected that she might have pulled a muscle while exercising at the gym. She told Mr Wardley that she had been to the doctor the day before about her high cholesterol, although he had not previously been aware of the intended visit.
The Day of the Death
On Friday, 6th
March 1998, the day of Mrs Waldron's death, the surgery received the results of the blood tests taken two days before. Shipman initialled them as being
'OK'
. They were entered on the computer just after 1.06pm by, according to Sister Morgan, a receptionist or possibly herself but not Shipman.
Meanwhile, Mrs Waldron had spoken to Mrs Nagle on the telephone at about 11am. She said that she felt better and the two ladies made arrangements to go out together the following week. Between 11.37am and 1.30pm, Mr Nigel Fletcher, a British Gas service engineer, was at Mrs Waldron's house. He says that Mrs Waldron appeared unwell, as if she had influenza, and had to sit down while she was talking to him about the installation of a new central heating boiler. However, he was not unduly concerned about her condition when he left.
In the early afternoon, Mr Wardley telephoned Mrs Waldron and found her much more cheerful. She seemed better than the previous evening and did not mention her painful leg. She confirmed that she would be able to go on a shopping expedition with him and her daughter over the weekend. She intended to buy a new sofa. She asked Mr Wardley to get her some bread. That call has been timed at 2.12pm and lasted just less than three minutes. Mr Wardley says that he telephoned her back a while later, to see if she was still in bed, as he wanted to know if he should bring his key when he came round. There was no reply. He tried again soon afterwards with the same result. He drove to her home, which took only a few minutes. He let himself in using his Yale key. He did not find Mrs Waldron in the lounge. He saw that the curtain, which divided the lounge from the dining area, was fully closed. He pulled it aside and found Mrs Waldron slumped against the side of the staircase which formed one wall of the dining area. She was dressed in a tracksuit that she often wore around the house. Her shoes had been taken off and were near to a chair at the end of the dining table. She was still warm and Mr Wardley thought that she had fainted. He tried to rouse her and then, when he could not, summoned an ambulance. That call was timed at 3.05pm. When Mr Wardley described the exact position in which he had found Mrs Waldron, it appeared to me that she might have been sitting on the dining chair between the end of the table and the side of the staircase and had for some reason collapsed to the floor after she had stood up to leave the chair.
The ambulance attended at 3.12pm and the paramedics diagnosed the fact of death at 3.15pm. They moved the body onto the settee in the lounge area. Mr Wardley then telephoned Mrs Waldron's daughters, Mrs Freeman and Mrs Lang. Meanwhile, the paramedics telephoned Shipman's surgery. That call was timed at 3.30pm. Mrs Lang and Mrs Freeman arrived first, then Shipman. The paramedics were still there when Shipman arrived. They left at 3.41pm so Shipman must have arrived within ten minutes of being called. Mrs Waldron's home was not far from the Market Street Surgery and I think it would have been quite possible for him to drive or walk the distance in less than ten minutes. Mrs Winton also arrived at the house.
Mrs Freeman, Mrs Lang and Mrs Winton all noticed that Mrs Waldron appeared to have been painting her finger nails shortly before her death. Her manicure basket was on one of the two settees in the lounge area. She had taken off her rings and bangles. Her daughters said that they believed that Mrs Waldron would have put her manicure set away as soon as she had finished her manicure and would have replaced her jewellery. The inference, they suggest, is that she was disturbed while doing her nails in the lounge and, for some reason, went into the dining area, closing the curtain behind her. It was drawn to my attention that the lounge window is so situated that passers-by could see straight into the lounge. If a doctor had called, the natural thing would be to go through into the dining area and draw the curtain for privacy.
When Shipman arrived, he was not carrying any bag or equipment such as a stethoscope. He did not examine Mrs Waldron or go near her. He said that she had had a coronary thrombosis. He said that Mrs Waldron knew that she had ischaemic heart disease and was being treated for it. He mentioned an ECG, which he said she had undergone and which had shown an abnormality. Mrs Freeman says she was flabbergasted to hear this and she questioned the diagnosis. She could not believe that her mother would not have told her if she were suffering from heart disease. She asked if there should be a post-mortem examination but Shipman said there was no point as it would not bring her back. When he was questioned further, it rather sounds as though Shipman tried to blind the family with science. Mrs Lang and Mr Wardley said that Shipman told them he could tell the cause of death from the position she had been found in. Mr Wardley says that Shipman said that if she had had a heart attack, she would have crumpled on the floor; if she had had a thrombosis, she would have got down onto the floor. That is what she had done, so he knew it was a thrombosis. This is complete nonsense as a coronary thrombosis is a heart attack. Even if Mr Wardley's recollection of the exact words used is faulty, Shipman's claim that he could diagnose the cause of death on so slender an evidential basis gives rise to the suspicion that the diagnosis was not genuine. Despite Mrs Freeman's concerns, the family decided to accept Shipman's explanation and did not ask him to arrange a post-mortem examination. Shipman expressed no surprise at the death and appeared somewhat unsympathetic in his attitude.
Shipman's computerised entry relating to the death says:
'O/E - dead.
15.40
(
presumably the time of his arrival, which is approximately correct
)
found by boyfriend 1440 amb death at 1500 ct ihd'
.
The audit trail revealed that this entry was made on 7th
March at 8.54am. The entry suggests falsely that Mr Wardley and the ambulance arrived before Mrs Waldron died.
The Aftermath
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). He stated that he last saw Mrs Waldron alive on 4th
March 1998. I have come to the conclusion that that was probably true, subject to his having also seen her alive on the day of her death, although I did entertain some suspicion that the entry of that date might have been false. He certified the cause of death as coronary thrombosis with an interval between onset and death of minutes; he stated that the coronary thrombosis had in turn been caused by ischaemic heart disease, the onset of which had occurred two years previously. There is no support in the medical records for the suggestion that Mrs Waldron had been suffering from ischaemic heart disease at all, let alone for two years. Shipman cited hypercholesterolaemia as a significant condition contributing to the death and stated that Mrs Waldron had had that condition for ten years. There is evidence in the medical records that Mrs Waldron's cholesterol levels had been under intermittent review since 1988, when they were found to be raised.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He stated that the death occurred at
'About 1500'
and that he had attended Mrs Waldron for three months during her last illness. This implies that Mrs Waldron had been suffering from recognisable effects of ischaemic heart disease, which she was not. This statement was untrue and must have been a deliberate lie. In fact, there was no last illness as a raised cholesterol level cannot possibly be described as one.
Shipman repeated that he had last seen Mrs Waldron alive on 4th
March 1998 and stated that he had seen her about 40 minutes after her death when he made a complete external examination. He also stated that the mode of death was
'Coma'
lasting
'20-30 minutes'
, that information, consistent with the medical record, supposedly being based upon observations made by Mrs Waldron's
'Boyfriend
Paramedics'
. In fact, of course, the three of them arrived when Mrs Waldron was already dead and were unable to give any information about the mode or duration of her death. Shipman also falsely stated that Mr Wardley and the paramedics were present at the moment of death. It is clear from the record made by the paramedics that they were not.
Some time after the death, probably on 12th
March, Mrs Lang made an appointment to see Shipman to discuss her mother's death. Shipman was rather vague but said that Mrs Waldron had had a number of minor complaints which had accumulated. He repeated that he had performed an ECG, which showed abnormalities, but these had not required treatment or medication. No reference to an ECG record has been found among Mrs Waldron's medical records. While it is theoretically possible that the record itself has been lost, I am confident that there would have been a reference to it if one had been taken. I am quite satisfied that Shipman's claim that he had taken an ECG was false, as, of course, was the further claim that it showed any abnormality.
Shipman's Movements and the Time of Death
There is no direct evidence of Shipman visiting Mrs Waldron on the day of her death. According to the telephone billing records, her conversation with Mr Wardley ended at about 2.15pm and it is clear from the timing of the first call to the ambulance service that Mr Wardley must have arrived at her home at about 3pm. If Shipman killed her, then he must have visited during that 45 minute period. That period is long enough for Shipman to have visited and killed Mrs Waldron. It is also long enough for her to have died of a heart attack.
Shipman's morning surgeries finished unusually early on that day, probably because there was refurbishment work to be carried out in the surgery reception area that day and the next. However, Shipman had an appointment with Mrs Mathews of Schering-Plough Limited, a pharmaceutical company. She cannot remember how long the meeting lasted but is positive from her experience of similar meetings that, even allowing for some delay in starting, she would have left the surgery by 12.30pm at the latest. After that, Shipman had until afternoon surgery at 4pm to make his visits. That day, he had two visits on his list. Although the names have been redacted on the published version of this document, the Inquiry knows that one patient lived at The Sycamores home in Hyde where Mrs Waldron had worked. Staff there say that Shipman was a regular visitor. He usually arrived at about 2pm and stayed no more than 15 minutes. He also had a visit at Ogden Court, which is sheltered accommodation not far from the Market Street Surgery. It would appear that he would not have been pressed for time and could easily have fitted in a visit to Mrs Waldron had he so wished. He could then have returned to the surgery. When summoned to attend following the discovery of Mrs Waldron's death, he would still have had time to get there and back before starting his afternoon surgery.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville observes that there was no basis on which Shipman could properly have attributed Mrs Waldron's death to a coronary thrombosis. If acting honestly, he could not have diagnosed the cause of death and would have referred the case to the coroner.
Dr Grenville pointed out that as a state registered nurse, Mrs Waldron would probably have been aware of exactly what Shipman was doing. He would need a good excuse for giving her an intravenous injection or persuading her to let him take a blood sample. Shipman sometimes gave a lethal dose of diamorphine under the guise of taking blood, as he did with Mrs Kathleen Grundy. I suspect that patients who were having regular blood tests were particularly vulnerable to Shipman. Even if there had been a recent blood test, as in this case, he could easily say that the last sample had been inadequate or the test had not been successful and ask for another. However, with Mrs Waldron, it might not have been so easy to dupe her into having an injection under the guise of giving a blood sample. For one thing, she would know that, at that time, a blood sample taken for the purpose of measuring cholesterol levels had to be taken after several hours' fasting. Second, the suction pump which most doctors use nowadays for taking a blood sample is different from the syringe used to give an injection. However, some doctors still use a syringe to take blood. If Shipman had managed to persuade Mrs Waldron to let him take a blood sample but had given an injection instead, Mrs Waldron might have realised what was happening part way through the procedure or as it came to an end. She might then have jumped up from her seat and moved away, only to fall as the drug took effect.
Dr Grenville was asked to think what type of drug Shipman might have pretended to give Mrs Waldron but he could not think of any drug which Shipman could have offered to give by the intravenous route. He might have offered, and, if she were in pain, Mrs Waldron might have accepted, an intramuscular dose of pethidine for her sciatica. However, it seems to me that this cannot provide an explanation for an injection which led to her sudden collapse and death which must, if an injection were given at all, have been given intravenously.
Several possibilities were canvassed with Dr Grenville, which might explain how, if Shipman had killed Mrs Waldron by a lethal injection of diamorphine, she came to be in a slumped but sitting position against the stairs. The first and most obvious is that Shipman might have put Mrs Waldron into that position against the stairs after she had fallen off her chair. That seems to me to be possible, even though Mrs Waldron was quite a heavy woman. It would explain why Shipman was at pains to claim that he could tell the cause of Mrs Waldron's death from the position in which she was found.
Another possibility was that Shipman had tried to give an injection through the intravenous route but the needle had come out of the vein. When this occurs, it is obvious and painful and the doctor usually withdraws the needle. If Shipman had not then given enough of the drug to be sure that the dose had been lethal, he might have pushed the needle further in, instead of withdrawing it. In that event, the rest of the dose would have entered subcutaneously and would have taken longer to reach full effect. Mrs Waldron might have felt dizzy and sick and have stood, tottered to the staircase and slid down to the position in which she was found. A yet further possibility was the one which I have already referred to, namely that Mrs Waldron might have submitted to give a blood sample and might have realised too late that she was being injected instead. Dr Grenville agreed that her position could be explained by the sudden realisation of what was happening, the withdrawal of her consent, her standing up, moving a short distance, feeling dizzy and sinking to the floor, possibly with Shipman's help.
Professor Richard Baker found the death moderately suspicious on the basis of the contents of the cremation forms and moderately so on the basis of the medical records.
Conclusion
There are a number of suspicious features surrounding this death.
The death was extremely sudden. Mrs Waldron had had back pain and sciatica in the days before her death, but there was no sign of any systemic illness. Although high cholesterol levels indicate some risk of developing ischaemic heart disease, there is no evidence whatever that Mrs Waldron had ever shown any signs or symptoms of that condition. Although it is possible that she suffered a sudden and wholly unexpected coronary thrombosis resulting in sudden death, such events are comparatively rare. Most heart attacks are presaged by some warning signs or symptoms and most people survive their first heart attack. Although Mrs Waldron could have died of a heart attack that day, her death from that cause was not at all likely. Nor is there any evidence that she was at risk of dying from any of the other common causes of sudden death. In particular, her blood pressure was normal. Although Dr Grenville says that the position in which Mrs Waldron was found was consistent with a natural death, he has also said that it is not positively inconsistent with death from lethal diamorphine injection. I conclude that, although a natural death was possible, it was unlikely.
Although there is no direct evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Waldron that day, there is some evidence from which it could be inferred that he might have done. First, there is the suggestion that Mrs Waldron seems to have been disturbed while doing her manicure. It would seem that she had been sitting in the lounge area, on one of the settees. Something appears to have occurred to cause her to go into the dining area and to close the curtain. A visit from the doctor is a likely explanation.
Shipman certainly had sufficient time to visit Mrs Waldron that afternoon. The family was anxious to impress upon me that Shipman appeared at the house extremely quickly after he was summoned and that there was no sign of his car in the street outside. Parking is very limited. They suspect that he had visited Mrs Waldron, killed her and left the house, remaining in the area until the body was found, when he could return and handle the formalities. I do not think that is likely. It is entirely feasible that Shipman could have arrived within ten minutes of being summoned even if he had returned to the surgery. He would be unlikely to remain in the area, if he knew Mrs Waldron was dead, as he would have no idea when the body would be found and he would have to be at Market Street by 4pm for afternoon surgery.
The false entries on the MCCD and cremation certificates give rise to real suspicion, as do the lies told by Shipman about Mrs Waldron's pre-existing heart disease and the supposed ECG trace. Shipman was seeking to present a plausible explanation for the death, when none was available. His suggestion in the medical records and on Form B, that Mrs Waldron was still alive when found by Mr Wardley and when the paramedics arrived, is highly suspicious. In my view, these statements are very unlikely to be based on a misunderstanding and are much more likely to be deliberately misleading. I think Shipman was trying to suggest to medical colleagues that Mrs Waldron had not been alone when she died and that responsible paramedics had given a description of the event, which had enabled him to give a reliable diagnosis of the cause of death.
Although there is no direct evidence of Shipman's presence at Mrs Waldron's house at the relevant time, the suspicious circumstances outlined above are such that I am satisfied that Shipman killed Mrs Waldron. The evidence falls short of that which would make me sure of my conclusion but I think it probable that Shipman killed her, probably by injecting her with diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001