The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Vera Whittingslow
Introduction
Mrs Vera Whittingslow died at her home, 110 Dowson Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 24th
June 1997 at the age of 69. She lived with her husband, Mr Kenneth David Whittingslow. They had been patients of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Both Mr and Mrs Whittingslow thought highly of Shipman and regarded him as a friend. He certified that the cause of Mrs Whittingslow's death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
In February 2000, following Shipman's convictions, Mr Whittingslow telephoned the police to express concern about the circumstances of his wife's death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mr Whittingslow.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Whittingslow but an inquest into her death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mr Whittingslow, together with a statement from Mr and Mrs Whittingslow's son, Mr Nigel Whittingslow. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Whittingslow's general practitioner and hospital records, and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The district nursing records have been obtained.
This decision has been made after consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
In 1954, Mrs Whittingslow was diagnosed as suffering from the rare progressive neurological disorder known as syringomyelia, which affects the spinal column and, in Mrs Whittingslow's case, resulted in a gradual loss of mobility. In 1987, she lost the use of her limbs and became wheelchair-bound.
Mr and Mrs Whittingslow were impressed by the efforts Shipman made to find out as much as possible about this disease. As the disease progressed and Mrs Whittingslow's condition deteriorated, Shipman visited more regularly. During the last three or four years of her life, Shipman would visit Mrs Whittingslow on a weekly or fortnightly basis, on a Tuesday or Wednesday. Mrs Whittingslow was either his last call of the day on Tuesday or his first call on Wednesday. The medical records confirm these regular visits during which Shipman would take Mrs Whittingslow's blood pressure, as she also suffered from hypertension.
The blood pressure readings recorded in the Lloyd George notes confirm that Mrs Whittingslow had a history of hypertension. The district nursing records show that Mrs Whittingslow told the nurse in April 1995 that her blood pressure sometimes rose to very high levels. The readings recorded in the medical notes show that the hypertension was well controlled by nifedipine. Mrs Whittingslow attended the Manchester Royal Infirmary hypertension clinic for some years before her death and had attended most recently on 18th
June 1997, one week before she died. Her blood pressure on that date was recorded to be 150/85, which is both normal and within the target blood pressure set by the clinic.
Mr Whittingslow recalls that, during his visits, Shipman would administer regular injections of vitamin B. The drug history details taken from the computerised medical records confirm a prescription of hydroxocobalamin injections (vitamin B12). Mrs Whittingslow had also been prescribed Glucophage, a drug for the control of diabetes.
During these visits, Shipman would talk freely with Mr and Mrs Whittingslow. Sometimes they would discuss Shipman's camping holidays, but Shipman caused Mr Whittingslow some anxiety when he discussed two topics. He would talk of his mounting level of debt and, although he would never directly solicit donations, they were readily accepted when given. Also, Shipman would very often refer to recent deaths of his patients. It seemed to Mr Whittingslow that a lot of Shipman's patients were dying.
Mrs Whittingslow suffered from depression in the later years of her life. Her son, Mr Nigel Whittingslow, recalls that at one time she expressed a wish to die, although he cannot recall when. Mr Whittingslow knew that his wife had said this to their son, although she never said anything of that nature to her husband.
The weekend before Mrs Whittingslow died, she and Mr Whittingslow stayed in their caravan in Pilling. Mr Whittingslow recalls that, despite the fact that her illness was at an advanced stage, his wife seemed well in herself and was certainly better than she had been for some time.
The Day of the Death
At about 10am on 24th
June 1997, two district nurses came to the house to bathe and dress Mrs Whittingslow. At about 12.30pm, Mr and Mrs Whittingslow had lunch. They both then had a rest.
At about 2pm, Mr Whittingslow saw Shipman walking to the front door. Mr Whittingslow was surprised, as it was much earlier than Shipman's usual visit. Mr Whittingslow recalls that it took a minute or two to wake his wife. Shipman examined Mrs Whittingslow and took her blood pressure. He said that her blood pressure was 'very, very high' and that she should be in hospital but was too ill to be moved. It is recorded in the Lloyd George notes that her blood pressure was 200/110, which is extremely high. Shipman said that Mrs Whittingslow required medication urgently to reduce her blood pressure. He looked in his bag and said that he did not have anything suitable with him. He wrote a prescription and asked Mr Whittingslow to go to the chemist and collect the medication. Naturally, Mr Whittingslow went immediately. The prescription has been recovered. It was for terazosin, the first dose of which causes a rapid drop in blood pressure.
When Mr Whittingslow returned home about 20 minutes later, he saw Shipman coming out of the front door. He was carrying a case, described by Mr Whittingslow as 'a case for carrying samples, a wooden box with a handle in the centre'. Mr Whittingslow asked how his wife was and Shipman said she was fine. They had been having a chat and a cup of tea. He said that he had taken a blood sample so that the hospital could discover the cause of the high blood pressure. Shipman continued walking towards his car and said that he would return to the house shortly.
When Mr Whittingslow reached the bedroom, he immediately thought his wife had died. Her head was back and her mouth wide open. He took his wife's hand and tried to rouse her but there was no response. Shipman had by now returned to the house and came into the room. He asked how Mrs Whittingslow was, to which Mr Whittingslow replied that he thought she was dead. Shipman placed two fingers on Mrs Whittingslow's neck and then said, 'Oh Ken, she's dying. I will sit in your lounge and read the paper for ten minutes while you have the last minutes with her'. He left the room. Mr Whittingslow stayed with his wife but she did not stir. At about 3.15pm, Shipman returned to the bedroom, placed his fingers on her neck again and said, 'She has gone now, Ken'. He carried out no further examination.
In his statement to the police, Mr Whittingslow described finding his wife lying on the bed with her head back and her mouth open. In his statement to the Inquiry, Mr Whittingslow described how his wife was sitting in her chair, with her right hand on her lap and her left hand on the arm of the chair, palm up. He recalls that there was a small spot of blood on the left wrist, about the size of a five pence piece. He assumed, as Shipman had no doubt intended him to assume, that this was where the blood sample had been taken.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). He said that the death was caused by cerebrovascular accident, due to hypertension. He said that the approximate interval between the onset of the cerebrovascular accident and death was 15 minutes. Hypertension had been present for ten years. Syringomyelia, present for 60 years, was a significant condition contributing to death but not related to the cerebrovascular accident.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He certified the time of death as
'1545hrs'
and said that he had attended Mrs Whittingslow for one hour during her last illness. He had seen her immediately before and immediately after death. He recorded the mode of death to be coma of only minutes' duration and said that both he and Mr Whittingslow were present at the moment of death.
Medical Evidence
There are three entries dated 24th
June 1997 on the surgery computer. The first records the diagnosis
'CVA unspecified'
and includes the comment
'multiple over past few days'
. The second confirms that Mrs Whittingslow was confirmed dead at
'15.45'
and states the causes of death. The final entry records the fact of a home visit. The only entry on the Lloyd George cards relating to the day of the death records a blood pressure reading of 200/110. There is no account of the issue of a prescription or the taking of a blood sample or the happening of a stroke. These omissions are startling. Dr John Grenville has said in his generic evidence that it is good practice for a doctor to make a full and careful note when a sudden death takes place in his presence.
The entry that suggests that Mrs Whittingslow had had multiple strokes over the past few days is probably false. There is no other reference to any such attacks in the medical notes and computerised records. It is highly unlikely that Mr Whittingslow told Shipman that his wife had been having transient ischaemic attacks in the last few days, as it is his recollection that his wife had been well over the previous weekend. I suspect that this entry was designed to give the false impression that Mrs Whittingslow was at an even higher risk of stroke than she really was. Her blood pressure had been very well controlled for several months. I also suspect that the reading noted on the day of the death may have been false. It is extremely high at 200/110 and is quite out of the range of readings recorded during the previous few months. Although I accept that the blood pressure could have increased suddenly, I am bound to suspect that Shipman's claim that it had increased was no more than a ruse to get Mr Whittingslow out of the house.
Following his consideration of the cremation certificate, Professor Richard Baker concluded that the death of Mrs Whittingslow was highly suspicious.
Conclusion
There are several highly suspicious factors in the circumstances surrounding this death.
Mrs Whittingslow was clearly unwell at the time of her death and, in particular, suffered from high blood pressure. However, the hypertension was well controlled by medication and during the days before she died, Mrs Whittingslow appeared well. She died during a visit from Shipman. This is a highly suspicious factor in itself. Other doctors say that this is a very rare occurrence in their experience. Many of Shipman's patients died in his presence. Where that has happened, it is necessary to examine his conduct with extreme care and scepticism.
It is possible that Mrs Whittingslow's blood pressure was raised to the extent recorded by Shipman in the Lloyd George notes and, if so, it may have been reasonable for Shipman to ask Mr Whittingslow to collect the medication required to reduce her blood pressure. However, taking the circumstances of this case as a whole, it is far more likely that Shipman fabricated the blood pressure reading and sent Mr Whittingslow to the chemist in order to be left alone with Mrs Whittingslow and also to create the impression that a medical emergency existed. While Mr Whittingslow was away, Shipman had an opportunity to administer an injection of diamorphine.
When Mr Whittingslow returned from the chemist, Shipman said that he had taken a blood sample for the purposes of analysing the cause of the high blood pressure. Such tests exist and it is possible that Shipman took a blood sample. However, it is more likely that Shipman did not take a sample but said that he had done so to provide an explanation for the mark on Mrs Whittingslow's hand where he had injected her. I have come across other cases where Shipman has explained a mark in this way.
When Mr Whittingslow said to Shipman that he thought his wife had died, Shipman placed two fingers on her neck and said that she was dying. If it is possible to tell that a patient is dying by feeling a pulse (which is doubtful), any doctor who believed that to be the situation should not walk away and do nothing. He should consider whether the patient should be taken to hospital as an emergency. I accept that there are circumstances in which such action is not in the patient's best interest but such a decision should not be taken without discussion if a relative is present. When Shipman returned to the bedroom, he did not carry out a full external examination, as he was later to claim. He only felt for a pulse in the neck. Dr Grenville states that it is not possible to diagnose death in such a way. The suspicion arises that Shipman already knew Mrs Whittingslow was dead because he had killed her.
I have said that I think Shipman made a false entry in the medical records when he said that Mrs Whittingslow had had multiple cerebrovascular accidents during the last few days. In my view, this false entry was designed to make her condition appear more parlous than it was. This entry would have allayed any concerns expressed by the doctor signing Form C or by the medical referee.
Shipman's account of events is wholly implausible. It would have been the most extraordinary coincidence if Mrs Whittingslow, having been her normal self on the day of her death, suddenly presented with extremely high blood pressure as soon as Shipman arrived, settled down and had a cup of tea whilst her husband went to pick up a prescription, then lapsed into a coma, seconds before her husband returned from the chemist, and died half an hour later. That implausibility, and the other factors to which I have referred, have driven me to the sure conclusion that Shipman killed Mrs Whittingslow by injecting her with a strong opiate, almost certainly diamorphine, of which he was known to have illicit supplies.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001