The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Sarah Jane Williamson
Introduction
Mrs Sarah Jane Williamson died at her home, 2 Thorsby Avenue, Hyde on Sunday, 15th
October 1989 at the age of 82. She had been a patient of Shipman probably since 1977 when he arrived in Hyde. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of information contained in the cremation certificate, the death of Mrs Williamson was highly suspicious. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mr Alfred Dalton, Mrs Williamson's younger brother. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mr Dalton. Mrs Williamson lived in a warden-controlled bungalow but attempts to trace the warden at Thorsby Avenue have revealed that she is now dead.
The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Williamson's computerised medical records (although no clinical details were entered onto the computer prior to her death), the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer diary, Shipman's visits book for 1989, as well as to the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation. Mrs Williamson's handwritten medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Williamson and her husband Jack had two daughters, Beatrice and Sheila. Mr Williamson died in 1978. Beatrice also pre-deceased her mother. Mrs Williamson had not been in contact with her other daughter, Mrs Sheila Broadhurst, for some years by the time of her death.
Mr Dalton describes his sister as having been short and overweight. Her mobility was poor. He does not recall any specific illnesses and was unaware of any cardiac problems. He does recall that she spent a short time in hospital at some stage but he cannot remember why. Mr Dalton thought that his sister was in reasonable health and her sudden death was wholly unexpected and came as a great shock to him.
Mr Dalton states that, shortly after the death of her husband, Mrs Williamson moved into a warden-controlled flat, as she was experiencing difficulties in getting about her house. Then, in the year before she died, Mrs Williamson moved in to the warden-controlled bungalow where she later died, because she was experiencing difficulty in negotiating the stairs in the block of flats. There, Mr Dalton and his wife, Mrs Sylvia Dalton, visited her regularly and helped with the shopping, cleaning and washing. As a matter of routine, they would visit on Monday, Wednesday and Friday. In addition, Mrs Williamson had meals delivered by the meals on wheels service.
There was no telephone in the bungalow but if Mrs Williamson wanted to contact her brother, she would do so through the warden, who had his telephone number.
It does not appear that Shipman was visiting Mrs Williamson on a regular basis in the weeks before her death. The last occasion on which her name appears in Shipman's visits book was 19th
September 1989.
The Day of the Death
In his statement to the police, Mr Dalton said that, on the morning of the day of his sister's death, he and his wife visited her at the bungalow. He said that they stayed until about lunchtime. His sister was her usual self and did not complain of feeling unwell. He recalled that she expressed satisfaction with her general circumstances and gratitude for the help she received from her neighbours. Mr Dalton has now reconsidered the position and, in his statement to the Inquiry, he says that he cannot recollect this visit and cannot think why he would have visited Mrs Williamson on a Sunday. He cannot say categorically that the visit did not take place but, if it did, he has no recollection of it. If he is mistaken about the visit on that day, then Mr Dalton asserts that, on the last occasion he saw his sister, she was well and extremely happy.
In the late afternoon or early evening, while Mr Dalton was at his son's house in Haughton Green, he received a telephone call from the warden responsible for Thorsby Avenue. She asked that he should go to his sister's house as she was very ill and the doctor had been sent for.
Mr and Mrs Dalton went straight to Thorsby Avenue and arrived between 20 and 30 minutes later. They found Shipman at the house. It seems that the warden greeted them but did not come into the house. Shipman said that Mrs Williamson had just died. She was sitting in her favourite chair, wearing normal daytime clothes and had the outward appearance of being asleep. Shipman told Mr Dalton how to contact the undertaker and said that if he were to call into the surgery the next day, he could collect the MCCD.
We know from the duty doctor transfer book that, over the weekend of 14th
/15th
October, Shipman was the doctor on duty under the rota at the Donneybrook Surgery. A number of visits are recorded in Shipman's visits book for 15th
October but Mrs Williamson's name is not among them. This is not surprising as I think it likely that the listed visits would be those about which Shipman knew in advance and would not include emergency requests.
Certification
The MCCD counterfoil has been recovered by the Inquiry. Shipman certified that the cause of Mrs Williamson's death was coronary thrombosis. It is recorded on the counterfoil that a post-mortem examination would not be held, but that Shipman had seen Mrs Williamson alive on the day of her death and had seen her body after death.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He stated that death occurred at 4.30pm. He said that he had attended Mrs Williamson for half an hour during her last illness. He had last seen her alive immediately before death and was present at the moment of death. Nobody else was present at the moment of death. The cause of death was as stated on the MCCD counterfoil and the mode of death was said to have been collapse lasting only minutes. Shipman recorded that the answers to the questions as to cause and mode of death were based on his own observations.
Conclusion
In the absence of medical records it is not possible to discover Mrs Williamson's state of health at the time of her death. She was 82 and overweight so she would certainly have been at risk of suffering a heart attack. However, Shipman was not visiting her regularly and her brother was not aware that she had ever had cardiac problems. It is quite possible that Mrs Williamson had a cardiac episode on the afternoon of Sunday, 15th
October and that this was why the warden called out Shipman.
Suspicion arises that Shipman might have killed Mrs Williamson from examination of his conduct that afternoon. It appears from Form B that Shipman was with Mrs Williamson for about half an hour before her death. That would have been quite long enough for him to have summoned an ambulance and removed Mrs Williamson to hospital, which most doctors would think was the appropriate place for her to be if she were suffering from severe chest pain or having a heart attack. At some stage, Mrs Williamson must have gone into cardiac arrest. Yet Shipman did not attempt any form of resuscitation. For that he would have had to put her onto a hard surface, probably the floor. He did not; he left her in her chair. We do not know whether Shipman gave Mrs Williamson any medication. It might well have been appropriate for him to give a very small dose of an opiate drug, if Mrs Williamson was in severe pain. He certainly had the opportunity to give her any drug he had with him.
In many cases, the fact that the death takes place in Shipman's presence gives rise to a very high degree of suspicion. Dr John Grenville has said that it is extremely rare for a patient to die suddenly during a doctor's visit unless the patient is known to be suffering from a terminal illness or the doctor has been called out as an emergency on account of symptoms indicating a serious episode such as a heart attack or stroke. In this case, there was an emergency request. We do not know what the symptoms were but it is possible they were indicative of a heart attack. The mere fact that this death took place in Shipman's presence does not therefore raise a high degree of suspicion. What does arouse suspicion is that Shipman does not appear to have done what most reasonable doctors would have done in the circumstances. It is possible that Shipman might have made the decision to do nothing and to let nature take whatever course it would. I accept that there are some doctors who would regard that as appropriate. There is also a possibility that he decided to ensure that Mrs Williamson would not recover from her heart attack by giving her an excessive dose of opiate, which he always carried with him.
Mrs Williamson's position and appearance in death were not only inconsistent with any attempt at resuscitation, they were not typical of those usually seen following a death from heart attack. Mrs Williamson looked too comfortable. It is possible that Shipman decided not to do anything to attempt to prolong life, but gave a small dose of opiate to relieve the pain and then settled Mrs Williamson into a comfortable position. That might explain her appearance. However, my suspicion on this score remains, as her position and appearance were entirely typical of those seen in many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of opiate. If Shipman gave an injection of opiate (which I think he must have done to produce Mrs Williamson's peaceful and comfortable appearance), I think it is more likely that he gave a large dose, thereby ensuring death, than a small one, which might leave Mrs Williamson alive. My reason for so saying is that it would be entirely typical of his conduct.
The evidence in this case is far from clear. If, as is quite likely, Mrs Williamson had a heart attack that afternoon, Shipman certainly did not do what most doctors would have done in an attempt to prolong her life. There are real grounds to suspect that he killed her, by ensuring that she would not survive the heart attack. It would be entirely consistent with Shipman's philosophy that Mrs Williamson should not survive a heart attack. He did not believe in 'keeping elderly people going'. By 1989, Shipman had killed a large number of patients, mainly elderly and unwell. He was by this time an habitual killer. For that reason, I think it significantly more likely that he took a positive step to ensure that Mrs Williamson died (and died quickly) than that he merely gave palliative care and waited to see the outcome. My conclusion is that Shipman probably killed Mrs Williamson by giving her a lethal dose of opiate.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001