The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Percy Ward
Introduction
Mr Percy Ward died at his home, 6 Hollins Avenue, Hyde on Tuesday, 4th
January 1983 at the age of 90. He had been a patient of Shipman probably since 1977, when Shipman moved to Hyde. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Ward's death was senility.
In January 2001, Mr Ward's daughter, Mrs Kathleen Kenworthy, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her father's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Kenworthy and from her husband, Mr Thomas Kenworthy. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Kenworthy and her brother, Mr Norman Ward. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for the relevant period, the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation.
This decision has been written following consideration of the evidence and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
At the time of his death, Mr Ward was living with his wife, Mrs Minnie Ward, whose death in April 1996 has been investigated by the Inquiry. He was a strong man who was quite active for his age. In about 1981, however, he was found to have a duodenal ulcer, for which he was treated in hospital. Thereafter, he experienced a gradual deterioration in his health. Shortly before Christmas 1982, he was admitted into hospital because he had vomited blood and it was found that his ulcer had burst. The doctors explained to the family that they could not operate on Mr Ward because of his age. Mr Ward did not wish to spend Christmas in hospital and, a few days before Christmas Day, he was allowed home. Following his discharge from hospital, a district nurse attended him at home and helped him to wash and change his clothing. He spent most of his time in bed and it was clear that he was very poorly.
Mr Ward's name appears in Shipman's visits book for 22nd
, 29th
and 30th
December 1982.
The Day of the Death
Mr and Mrs Kenworthy visited Mr Ward on the morning of Tuesday, 4th
January 1983. He was very restless and was finding it difficult to breathe. He was in obvious distress. He told Mrs Kenworthy that he thought he was dying. At about 11.30am, Shipman was called for and he attended a very short time later. Shipman went into the bedroom to see Mr Ward who, by this stage, was having great difficulty in breathing. His breathing was very heavy. Mrs Kenworthy recalls that Shipman gave an injection into his left arm. Mr Kenworthy also recalls that Shipman administered an injection. Within minutes, Mr Ward seemed to calm down. His breathing was no longer heavy and he seemed to have ceased fighting. Shipman said words to the effect that it would 'not be long now' and asked the family to let him know, presumably when Mr Ward died. Mr Kenworthy then left to have some lunch and did not return until about 1pm to 1.30pm when he was told that Mr Ward had died. He believed that Shipman had given Mr Ward an injection to help him die more easily.
Mrs Kenworthy told the police that her father stopped breathing about an hour after the injection. She told the Inquiry, however, that her father died about ten minutes after Shipman left.
Shipman was contacted again and returned to certify the death. The family remembers that he just looked at the body from where he was standing and did not carry out any sort of examination.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that Mr Ward had died on 4th
January 1983. He said that he had last seen Mr Ward alive on the day of the death. He said that the cause of death was senility and that a chronic duodenal ulcer had contributed to the death. He said that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He recorded that death had occurred at 1.25pm on 4th
January 1983. He said that he had attended Mr Ward during his last illness for a period of at least three months. He stated that he last saw Mr Ward alive approximately six hours before his death and had made a complete external examination of the body about 20 minutes after death. The cause of death was stated as on the MCCD counterfoil. The mode of death was said to be coma lasting 12 hours. Shipman said that his answers as to mode and cause of death were based on his own observations. He recorded that Mr Ward had been nursed by his wife and District Nurse Simpson during his last illness and that Mr Ward's wife and daughter were present at the moment of his death.
The visits book confirms that Shipman was due to see Mr Ward on the day of his death.
The Expert Evidence
Following consideration of the cremation forms, Professor Richard Baker concluded that the death of Mr Ward was not suspicious.
Conclusion
Mr Ward was clearly very unwell in the days leading up to his death. On the morning of his death, he had great difficulty in breathing and was very restless. He was confined to bed and was receiving nursing care from the district nurse. The evidence is that Shipman came and administered an injection of some kind. As the medical records are not available, there is no possibility of knowing what was given. If Mr Ward was struggling to breathe and was very restless, he may have been distressed and it may, therefore, have been appropriate to give some sort of sedative or euphoric drug such as an opiate. That he appeared to relax after the injection would suggest that some such drug was given. The question then arises as to whether Shipman gave the injection primarily to relieve distress or in order to hasten Mr Ward's death.
There is real cause to suspect that Shipman might have given a dose of drug which was intended to kill. It appears that Mr Ward died within an hour of the injection, possibly even sooner. If a lethal dose of opiate had been given intramuscularly, death would have followed within about an hour. However, that does not show that the dose was a lethal one, as it is possible that Mr Ward died naturally an hour after the injection. A further cause for suspicion arises from Shipman's words after giving the injection. He appeared to know that Mr Ward would not live long. That might indicate that he knew that Mr Ward would die soon because he had just received a lethal injection. On the other hand, these words might have no more significance than the doctor's observation that the patient had not long to live.
Some of the information contained on Form B is inconsistent with the recollection of the witnesses. In particular, Shipman recorded that he last saw Mr Ward alive approximately six hours before his death, which would have been at about 7.30am. I think it unlikely that Shipman visited as early as that in the day. It is possible that Shipman was seeking to distance himself from the death. Shipman claimed that the mode of death was a coma lasting 12 hours. This is not consistent with the evidence of Mr Ward's daughter who said that he was able to speak to her on the morning of 4th
January. It is also not consistent with the need to administer a drug to relieve pain or distress. It would, however, be a plausible mode of death for someone dying of senility. It appears possible that Shipman was painting a picture of a death due to senility.
These factors give rise to a real suspicion that Shipman deliberately hastened Mr Ward's death. If circumstances such as these arose in connection with any other doctor, I would have little difficulty in concluding that the doctor had probably not intended to hasten the death. However, I know that by 1983 Shipman had killed a number of patients, some of whom were terminally or seriously ill. It would be typical conduct for Shipman to give an overdose of something, possibly an opiate, possibly a very large dose of Largactil, in order to hasten the patient's end. Taking this additional factor into account, I have come to the conclusion that Shipman probably hastened Mr Ward's death and that the death was not entirely due to natural causes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001