The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
George Lawton Wagstaff
Introduction
Mr George Lawton Wagstaff died at his home, 2 Gerrards Gardens, Hyde on Thursday, 29th
July 1993 at the age of 77. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed Shipman when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified the cause of his death as coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the police that he had assessed Mr Wagstaff's death as moderately suspicious having considered the medical records. However, he did not think that the cremation documentation raised any suspicions. The police investigated Mr Wagstaff's death and obtained a statement from his son, Mr Peter Stewart Wagstaff, who has never had any suspicions about Shipman's involvement in the death of his father.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Wagstaff but an inquest into his death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has had access to Mr Wagstaff's general practitioner and hospital records, and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
In the late 1980s, Mr Wagstaff began to suffer episodes of chest pain which were attributed to angina. Initially these were rare and did not interfere with his activities but, by 1990, they had become more frequent and more severe. In early 1990, Mr Wagstaff was diagnosed as suffering from Parkinson's disease. He was treated for this by Shipman and the symptoms were well controlled. Later that year, he was referred to a cardiologist at Manchester Royal Infirmary and the diagnosis of angina was confirmed. He continued to receive treatment for this condition and for Parkinsonism.
The Day of the Death
At about 7am on the morning of 29th
July 1993, Mr Peter Wagstaff was at home, when he received a telephone call from his mother who said that she thought her husband had died. He immediately went to his parents' home and found his father on his hands and knees over the bath. The only other person in the house was Mrs Wagstaff. Mr Peter Wagstaff moved his father from the bathroom and laid him out. Mr Wagstaff was cold to the touch and it was obvious to his son that he was dead.
A little later an ambulance arrived. The crew checked for signs of life but there were none. At about 8am, Shipman arrived and went to examine Mr Wagstaff. He confirmed that Mr Wagstaff had died and said that a post-mortem examination would not be necessary.
Shipman does not appear to have made any entry in the medical records for the day of the death.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. He said that he had last seen Mr Wagstaff alive on 22nd
July 1993. He said he had seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that death had occurred at
'About 0500'
on 29th
July 1993. He said that he had last seen Mr Wagstaff alive seven days before death. He almost certainly did not, although there is an entry in the medical records for 22nd
July. It says only
'rpt script'
(repeat prescription)
and there is no entry in the appointments sheet or visits book to indicate that doctor and patient had seen each other. Shipman also stated that he saw the body about two and a half hours after death and made a complete external examination. He said that the mode of death was collapse of only minutes' duration. He said that Mr Wagstaff's wife was present at the moment of death.
Conclusion
I can well understand why Professor Baker regarded this death as moderately suspicious on the basis of his examination of the medical records. They are extremely scanty and contain no account of the death. Form B is not satisfactory either. First, it is doubtful whether Shipman saw Mr Wagstaff on 22nd
July, as he claimed to have done. Also, it appears likely from Mr Peter Wagstaff's account, that his mother found her husband only a few moments before she telephoned him at 7am. When he arrived at the house, his father was already dead and felt cold. Thus, it is not clear on what basis Shipman has concluded that the death occurred at about 5am or how he could describe the mode of death, other than by assuming that Mr Wagstaff had collapsed and died within minutes. It was probably misleading for Shipman to say that Mrs Wagstaff was present at the moment of death, as she was probably asleep in bed. However, these probable inaccuracies do not affect the main issue, which is whether Mr Wagstaff died a natural death. On that issue, I am quite satisfied that he did. Mr Wagstaff was known to be suffering from angina and was therefore at risk of a sudden cardiac death. There is no evidence that Shipman had access to him in the hours before his death. The probable inaccuracies in Form B demonstrate Shipman's cavalier attitude to his duties in respect of death certification.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001