The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Henrietta Walker
Introduction
Mrs Henrietta Walker died at her home, 14 Orchard Street, Hyde on Friday, 25th
November 1994 at the age of 87. She had been a patient of Shipman for many years and thought highly of him. She followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the police that he considered Mrs Walker's death to be highly suspicious, on the basis of the information contained in the cremation certificate. The police investigated the death and took two statements from Mrs Margaret Ethel Lees, who is the widow of Mrs Walker's second cousin, Mr Robert Lees.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Walker but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Lees and has had access to Mrs Walker's general practitioner medical records and to the appointments sheets and visits books for the relevant period, as well as the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation. A report has been obtained from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Walker lived alone and managed to retain her independence with assistance from Mr and Mrs Lees and a home help. Mr Lees visited her virtually every day to do her shopping and collect her pension. Mrs Lees did Mrs Walker's laundry and visited once a week with her husband. Mrs Walker was mentally very alert but her mobility was poor as she suffered from arthritis. She underwent a knee replacement operation a few years before her death. She also suffered a number of falls over the years. On 20th
October 1994, as a result of one such fall, Mrs Walker was admitted to Tameside General Hospital. Following a transfer to Shire Hill Hospital for rehabilitation, she was eventually discharged home on 17th
November 1994. Following her return home from hospital, Mr and Mrs Lees moved a bed down to the ground floor of Mrs Walker's home and encouraged her not to use the first floor.
The envelope containing Mrs Walker's medical cards also contains the discharge letter from Tameside General Hospital, dated 1st
December 1994, which relates to Mrs Walker's last admission into hospital. Under the section headed
'History and Clinical Findings'
the following appears:
'The patient was found on the floor with laceration of the forehead. Apparently she tripped on the carpet and fell. No history of loss of consciousness. She has history of right knee replacement in the past and suffering from bad osteoarthritis of the left knee, taking Indomethacin. Her pulse was 64 per minute, blood pressure 140/70'
.
Other tests conducted during this admission revealed no other cause for concern. Dr Grenville, who has examined the medical records, observed that in 1986 Shipman had diagnosed Mrs Walker as having high blood pressure and had prescribed medication. It appears that thereafter her blood pressure was well controlled. Nonetheless, Dr Grenville says that Mrs Walker was at an increased risk of suffering a stroke.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Lees recalls that, on 25th
November 1994, she and her husband visited Mrs Walker, as usual, between 10.30am and 11am. Although Mrs Lees cannot now clearly remember how Mrs Walker was, she does recall that she was not entirely well. She thinks that Mrs Walker wanted Shipman to visit her, although it may be that Mr and Mrs Lees decided that Shipman ought to visit. In any event, it appears that while Mr Lees was in Hyde shopping he called in at the surgery to ask Shipman to visit. Mr and Mrs Lees had lunch with Mrs Walker and left her sitting in her armchair. By her side, they left some sandwiches and a flask of tea for her evening meal. When Mr and Mrs Lees left, they closed the front door behind them.
There is a note in the surgery visits book, made on 25th
November 1994, which supports Mrs Lees' recollection. It says:
'Henrietta Walker
14 Orchard Street, Hyde 12.55pm
(relation Robert Lees
...
... - out of hosp last
Thursday. Called
today looks like
had fall. Can't
see any damage
general health
not eating'
.
It appears that Mr Lees must have called at the surgery at 12.55pm but it is possible that he made the request for a visit by telephone.
The following entry appears in the computerised medical records for the day of death:
'Seen in own home
Dr H F Shipman
CVA unspecified
r side refuses hospital'
.
This entry would suggest that Shipman called on Mrs Walker, diagnosed a right-sided stroke and that Mrs Walker refused to go to hospital.
There are no corresponding entries in the handwritten records.
Mr Lees was anxious about his cousin and keen to learn what Shipman had said to her so, soon after he had finished his tea (some time after 5.30pm), he drove back to Mrs Walker's house. A while later, Mrs Lees received a telephone call from her husband. He was very distressed and said that Mrs Walker had died. He told her that he had found his cousin sitting on her bed, slumped over to one side. She looked very peaceful, as if she was asleep, and was fully dressed in the same clothes she had been wearing earlier that day. Her clothes were not in any disarray.
Mr Lees telephoned Shipman, who came to the house. According to Mrs Lees, Shipman told her husband that he had called on Mrs Walker on his way home from the surgery. He had rung the doorbell several times but there was no reply. He said he was just about to give up when he heard a rustle and, a short while later, Mrs Walker answered the door. Shipman accompanied her into the rear lounge and she got onto her bed. He did not say what he had found on examination but said that when he left her she was sitting on the bed. Shipman explained the death to Mr Lees by saying,
'She'll have had a stroke. At this age, they get little strokes'
. When Mr Lees asked if there would be a post-mortem examination, Shipman said it would not be necessary as he had been seeing Mrs Walker regularly. Shipman had an MCCD with him, which he completed and handed to Mr Lees.
Certification
On the MCCD, Shipman certified that the cause of death was a cerebrovascular accident, which had begun four hours before death. He said that he had last seen Mrs Walker alive on 25th
November, the day of the death. He also said that he had seen the body after death and there would be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He stated that death had occurred at 2.30pm on 25th
November 1994. He said he had attended Mrs Walker for one hour before her death and that he had last seen her alive about one hour before her death. He said that he saw the body about an hour after death and made a complete external examination. He gave the cause of death as on the MCCD and said that the mode of death was collapse lasting only seconds. He said that he based these answers on his own observations and added that Mrs Walker had been
'Found slumped on bed'
.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville observed that Mrs Walker was quite frail towards the end of her life and that her osteoarthritis caused mobility problems. He also said that she was at some increased risk of suffering a stroke on account of raised blood pressure. However, he noted that there was no evidence at all that Mrs Walker had a stroke at any time. When Mr and Mrs Lees were with her, they did not observe any signs indicative of a stroke. Mr Lees did not report any signs of a stroke to the surgery when he asked for the visit. Nor did Shipman record any signs of a stroke when he visited before Mrs Walker's death. Had he seen such signs, he ought to have recorded them and, if Mrs Walker had refused to go to hospital, he ought to have contacted Mr Lees, as it would not be appropriate for Mrs Walker to be left alone.
Dr Grenville observed that Mrs Walker's position when she was found was consistent with death from stroke or other common causes of sudden death. It was also consistent with death by lethal injection of opiates.
Professor Richard Baker considered the death to be highly suspicious on the basis of the information contained in the cremation documentation, presumably because the death occurred very close to the time of Shipman's visit.
Conclusion
There are several very suspicious features of this death. First and most obvious, the death was discovered very shortly after a visit by Shipman. No one saw Mrs Walker alive after Shipman's departure. If, as Shipman suggests, Mrs Walker died a natural death very shortly after he left, it would be something of a coincidence. In Shipman's professional life, this kind of 'coincidence' happened very frequently. In real life, such repeated coincidences do not occur and the temporal connection between Shipman's visit and the death is enough to lead me to the conclusion that Shipman probably killed Mrs Walker.
On Shipman's timings, as set out in the official documents, he visited at about 1.30pm while Mrs Walker was still alive and again at about 3.30pm, to certify the death. These timings do not accord with Mrs Lees' recollection but, as her memory is hazy on some details, I do not think I should find that Shipman's timings are wrong. However, on the MCCD, Shipman claimed that Mrs Walker had begun to suffer a stroke four hours before her death, which would have been at about 10.30am. That can be seen to be untrue, as when Mr Lees spoke to a receptionist at the surgery, he did not describe any sign or symptoms indicative of a stroke. A person suffering a right-sided stroke would have weakness in the right arm and leg and would probably have slurring of speech. Mr and Mrs Lees would have noticed such signs and Mr Lees would have reported them.
Dr Grenville has said in his generic evidence that an occlusive stroke (of the kind which causes weakness on one side) does not usually lead rapidly to death. Most patients survive such a stroke, with or without remaining disabilities, and those who do not, generally deteriorate gradually towards death over a period of two to three days. The circumstances prevailing here are not typical of death resulting from an occlusive stroke. It is possible that Mrs Walker died of a brain stem haemorrhage, which can cause sudden death but, if she did, Shipman cannot have diagnosed a right-sided stroke at the time of his visit. The claim that Mrs Walker died of a stroke does not ring true. My view is that Mrs Walker did not die of a stroke at all but as the result of an injection of opiate, probably diamorphine.
As Dr Grenville observed, any doctor who had a patient with signs of a stroke would not leave her alone. Whenever I find that Shipman has behaved in a way that no reasonable and competent doctor would behave, I suspect that events have not taken place as he claims. A claim that a sick patient has refused to go to hospital is a recurring theme in many cases in which Shipman killed.
This case has Shipman's hallmark on it. All the evidence either suggests that Shipman killed Mrs Walker or is consistent with the theory that he did. Although I recognise that it is possible that Mrs Walker died of a massive stroke in the brief interval between Shipman's departure and Mr Lees' return, I think that such an event would be so great a coincidence that I feel able to say that I am sure that Shipman caused Mrs Walker's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001