The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
May Warren
Introduction
Mrs May Warren died at her home, 3 Joel Lane, Hyde on either Saturday, 21st
or Sunday, 22nd
July 1984 at the age of 72. Her death was certified as having occurred on 22nd
July. She was a patient of Dr William Greig Bennett who in 1984 practised from the Donneybrook Surgery, as did Shipman. After a post-mortem examination without inquest, the South Manchester Coroner certified that the cause of her death was left ventricular failure due to ischaemic and hypertensive heart disease.
The Greater Manchester Police did not investigate Mrs Warren's death. Her death came to the attention of the Inquiry in the course of a search of the files of the South Manchester Coroner for deaths in which Shipman had been involved.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Warren's daughter, Mrs Sylvia Jones, and her husband, Mr Michael Jones. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1984 and to the coroner's papers. Mrs Warren's medical records have not survived. A report has been obtained from Professor Helen Whitwell.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Warren was a widow who at the time of her death lived alone. Mrs Jones says that her mother had always enjoyed excellent health. She had never suffered from heart trouble. She had never been admitted to hospital. However, Mrs Jones suspects that her mother suffered from high blood pressure. Mrs Warren was wary of doctors and, to Mrs Jones' knowledge, had not consulted her general practitioner for some time. Mrs Jones believes that if her mother had had occasion to call out a doctor, she would have been informed.
Mrs Warren was very security conscious. On one occasion, she had returned home to find a stranger in her front room. Following this experience she always kept both her front and back doors locked.
Mrs Jones spoke to her mother over the telephone a few days before she died. Mrs Warren mentioned that she had cooked a farewell lunch for her other daughter, Mrs Hilary Gorton, who was due to move from Hyde to Cambridgeshire. Mrs Warren said that she was looking forward to the future and that she was thinking of buying a sofa bed for when Mrs Gorton and her family came to visit. Mrs Warren sounded well and made no mention of suffering from chest pain.
The Death
At about lunchtime on Sunday, 22nd
July 1984, Mrs Jones received a telephone call from a police officer who told her that her mother had died. Mrs Jones was very shocked by this news and telephoned her sister in Cambridgeshire. Mr and Mrs Jones drove to Mrs Warren's house, arriving between 3pm and 4pm. Mr Jones identified Mrs Warren's body to a police officer who had waited at her house. He recalls that Mrs Warren was sitting on a chair and her upper body was slumped over the kitchen table. Her head was resting on her left arm and she was wearing a nightdress. She looked very pale and rigor mortis had set in. Mr Jones noticed that the kitchen was very tidy and there was no evidence that Mrs Warren had eaten breakfast. There were no unwashed dishes, except for a small glass by the kitchen sink, which had a residue of white powder at the bottom of it. The bedroom was tidy and her clothes for the day were laid out. The back door was open.
Mrs Jones went to see one of her mother's neighbours, Mrs Chatburn, who has since died. Mrs Chatburn, who was also shocked by the news of Mrs Warren's death, said that Mrs Warren had visited her the previous evening and had complained of slight chest pain. Mrs Chatburn had advised her to call the doctor. Mrs Chatburn told Mrs Jones that Mrs Warren had been complaining of indigestion for some time. Mrs Warren left Mrs Chatburn at about 9.10pm. Mrs Chatburn also told Mrs Jones that she had learned of how the body had been discovered. A lady called Mrs Pauline Derbyshire had told Mrs Chatburn that she had been walking her dog on the Sunday when it had strayed into Mrs Warren's house through the open back door. Mrs Derbyshire had gone into the house to retrieve her dog and had discovered Mrs Warren slumped across the kitchen table. The Inquiry has been unable to trace Mrs Derbyshire.
The duty doctor transfer book reveals that Shipman was the Donneybrook doctor on duty for the weekend of 21st
and 22nd
July. The book shows that on Saturday evening he stayed on duty until 10.45pm before handing over to the deputising service. He would have been on duty the following morning from about 8am. If Mrs Warren had telephoned for a doctor, either before 10.45pm on Saturday or after 8am on Sunday, it would have been Shipman who attended. Mrs Warren's name appears in Shipman's visits book for 22nd
July 1984, but this may have been a reminder for him to attend after the body had been discovered.
The Referral to the South Manchester Coroner
The coroner's papers suggest that Shipman saw Mrs Warren's body at 2.51pm on Sunday, 22nd
July. It appears that he refused to certify the cause of death and referred the case to the coroner. Mrs Warren's death was said to have occurred at some time between 9.10pm on 21st
July and 1.40pm on 22nd
July. The body had been found at 1.40pm by Mrs Pauline Derbyshire. It is noted that Mrs Warren had not seen a doctor for eight years.
The post-mortem examination was carried out by Dr H S Day, whose report reveals that both lungs were found to be congested and oedematous. The heart was enlarged and there was left ventricular hypertrophy. The coronary vessels showed severe grades of atheromatous changes. The walls of the coronary vessels were calcified and were nearly occluded in places. The aorta showed moderate grades of atheromatous changes. In Dr Day's opinion, the cause of death was left ventricular failure due to ischaemic and hypertensive heart disease.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Whitwell says that Mrs Warren had severe underlying natural heart disease. She says that it is well recognised that ischaemic heart disease may be present and yet there may be little or nothing by way of symptoms or signs. Mrs Warren's heart disease was severe and was sufficient to explain the death. However, the condition was long-standing and there were no pathological features seen at post-mortem examination to demonstrate positively that this was a cardiac death. Professor Whitwell says that Mrs Warren's position in death was consistent with a sudden cardiac death.
Conclusion
In my view, it is highly likely that Mrs Warren died as the result of natural causes. Very little indeed is known about her medical history, but it is clear that she had a severe degree of ischaemic heart disease. It would appear that this gave rise to only minor symptoms of discomfort, which Mrs Warren attributed to indigestion. It seems likely that she might have used a proprietary indigestion remedy. It appears that on the evening of 21st
July, her symptoms were rather more severe and she told Mrs Chatburn that she had chest pain. Although Mrs Chatburn advised her to call the doctor, I think it is very unlikely that she would have done so. Her daughter says that she was wary of doctors and it appears that she had not seen a doctor for eight years. I think, therefore, it is unlikely that she would have called the doctor out either late on the Saturday night or early on Sunday morning. I think it is more likely that she took a dose of indigestion medicine and left the glass by the sink. I think that at some stage, her symptoms became suddenly worse and she must have opened the back door to get some fresh air. Dr Grenville says that this is a common reaction in patients suffering from acute ventricular failure. I think she must then have collapsed onto her chair, slumped over the table and died. Whether this happened in the late evening shortly before she went to bed, or shortly after she got up in the morning, I do not think we will ever know.
It is theoretically possible that Mrs Warren telephoned for a doctor, either late on Saturday evening or early on Sunday morning, and that Shipman visited her. If he did, it is possible that he killed her. However, in all the circumstances, I regard that as extremely unlikely.
The fact that a visit by Shipman cannot be ruled out makes it impossible to conclude that her death was due to natural causes. If he did attend, there is a possibility that he could have killed her with a lethal injection of diamorphine. The major findings at post-mortem examination, however, reveal that Mrs Warren had severe underlying natural heart disease and the heart showed evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy. These findings could explain the death but in the absence of evidence of acute pathology, cannot be said definitively to do so.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001