The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Albert Redvers Williams
Introduction
Mr Albert Redvers Williams died at his home, 76 Industrial Street, Todmorden on Tuesday, 5th
August 1975 at the age of 75. According to the Report of Death prepared by the West Yorkshire Metropolitan Police, dated 6th
August 1975, Mr Williams was registered as a patient of Shipman at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre. Shipman had been practising in Todmorden for about 17 months at the time of Mr Williams' death. Following a post-mortem examination without inquest, the Deputy Coroner for the Metropolitan District of Calderdale certified that the cause of Mr Williams' death was heart failure due to coronary occlusion due to atheroma.
Mr Williams' death was one of a number of coroner's cases which the police included in their investigations into Shipman's activities during his time in Todmorden. The police investigated the death because Mr Williams was a patient of Shipman, and Shipman visited him at home shortly before his death. The police took a statement from Mr Wilfred Ormerod, Mr Williams' stepson.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mr Ormerod. Mr Williams' general practitioner records have not survived. The Inquiry has had access to the Report of Death and a post-mortem report prepared by Dr A T Edwards, consultant pathologist, dated 6th
August 1975. The Inquiry has also obtained reports from Professor Helen Whitwell and Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Williams was employed in a cotton mill for most of his working life. In 1963, he was diagnosed as suffering from byssinosis, or cotton dust disease. In 1965, his first wife died and he retired from work in the same year. In that year, he was told that he had ischaemic heart disease. In 1966, he suffered from chronic bronchitis. Despite these problems, Mr Williams remained active and appeared to be in quite good health. In 1972, he married Mrs Lily Ormerod, Mr Ormerod's mother, and moved into a house in Todmorden. The marriage was a success. Mr Ormerod says that Mr Williams was a kind and gentle man and he and his new wife got on very well together. Mr Williams seemed to keep quite well, although he walked with a stick. He was a smoker. Although Mr Ormerod knew that his stepfather was a smoker and took quite a large number of pills, he did not know until after Mr Williams' death, that, for about two months, Mr Williams had had severe breathing problems and had been unable to climb the stairs. Mr Ormerod last saw his stepfather about a week before his death. He thought he was in his usual health.
The Day of the Death
During the morning of 5th
August, according to the Report of Death, Mr Williams complained of difficulty in breathing. Shipman visited Mr Williams at about 11.30am that day. This was a pre-arranged routine visit. Shipman prescribed tablets, apparently to relieve Mr Williams' pain. The officer compiling the Report of Death did not say elsewhere in the report that Mr Williams was in pain. Mr Ormerod does not say that he was told that Mr Williams had been in pain. It is unclear from the report what the tablets were, whether Shipman wrote out a prescription for dispensing at a pharmacy or whether Shipman actually gave Mr Williams some tablets. It is not clear whether Shipman was even left alone with Mr Williams. At about 1pm, after Shipman had left, Mrs Williams noticed that her husband was very still in his chair, with his eyes closed. When she examined him closely, she realised that he had died.
At about lunchtime, Mr Ormerod received a message from Mrs Marshall, his mother's next door neighbour, asking him to go to his mother's house immediately. He arrived about 15 minutes later. On entering the living room, he saw his stepfather sitting in his usual chair, but slumped and obviously dead. There was a small electric fan beside him. This belonged to Mrs Marshall, who was there with Mrs Williams. Mr Ormerod went out to make arrangements. He went to the surgery to ask for a doctor to visit. Then he went to an undertaker. He then returned to his mother's house. He had been away for about 30 to 45 minutes. It now appears that, while he was away, Shipman came to examine the body and pronounced that Mr Williams was dead. He also completed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), which gave the causes of death as respiratory failure due to chronic bronchitis and emphysema due to byssinosis. Ischaemic heart disease was said to have contributed to the death but was unrelated to the immediate cause.
On his return, Mr Ormerod found two police officers in the house. They were questioning his mother, who was very distressed. At one stage, Mrs Williams said to the police officers something like, 'It was the pills the doctor gave him that killed him'. Mr Ormerod, who did not then know that a doctor had been that morning, thought that his mother was very upset and confused and was referring to her husband's regular medication. He indicated to the officers that his mother did not know what she was saying. Soon afterwards, the officers left. Mr Ormerod did not discuss the circumstances of Mr Williams' death with his mother and never found out what she had actually meant when speaking to the officers.
The Aftermath
It appears that, when the MCCD was presented to the registrar, she refused to register the death but referred it to the coroner, probably because of the history of byssinosis. The police established that, although the diagnosis of byssinosis had been made, Mr Williams had not received any disablement benefit because he had not worked in one of the scheduled occupations for the prescribed period prior to the diagnosis.
The post-mortem report noted the presence of some lung pathology, although nothing diagnostic of byssinosis. The heart was found to be grossly enlarged due to dilatation of the left ventricle where there was extensive scarring of both anterior and posterior walls due to old healed infarct. The coronary arteries were said to be very severely occluded by atheroma, and this was thought to be the primary cause of Mr Williams' disability in the few years prior to his death. The cause of death was said to be heart failure due to coronary occlusion due to atheroma. Byssinosis was not said to have had any bearing on the death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Whitwell reviewed the post-mortem examination report. She noted signs, not only of significant long-standing lung disease, but also of acute bronchopneumonia superimposed on that disease. She thought that the causes of death would more accurately be stated as bronchopneumonia due to chronic obstructive airways disease, with severe ischaemic heart disease as a contributory factor. From the clinical and pathological evidence, Mr Williams was in a clearly terminal state. Whilst it is impossible to say (because no toxicological tests were performed) whether or not Mr Williams was given any lethal medication on the day of his death, the pathology present fully explained his death, which was inevitable within hours or days.
Dr Grenville noted that Mr Williams had been unable to climb the stairs to bed in the two months before his death. He observed that this was consistent with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and/or ischaemic heart disease. The report that, on 5th
August 1975, Mr Williams was suffering from a wheezing chest and had difficulty in breathing, was consistent with an acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or with acute left ventricular failure consequent upon ischaemic heart disease.
Assuming that Shipman was not responsible for Mr Williams' death, the structure of this MCCD completed by Shipman suggests to Dr Grenville that when Shipman saw Mr Williams shortly before his death, Shipman felt he was dealing with a respiratory illness rather than a cardiac condition. It is not clear to Dr Grenville what sort of tablets, if any, Shipman gave to Mr Williams that day. If Shipman thought he was dealing with an exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, it would have been appropriate to have given or prescribed antibiotics and/or steroids. If Shipman thought that he was dealing with acute or sub-acute left ventricular failure, it would have been appropriate either to admit Mr Williams to hospital or to treat him with intravenous injections of a very small dose of a strong opiate and a diuretic, but it would not have been appropriate to treat him with any oral medication.
Dr Grenville noted that the officer compiling the Report of Death had suggested that Shipman gave Mr Williams tablets for pain and observed that there was no other evidence of this. He continued:
'If Shipman did, in fact, give Mr Williams opiates in tablet form, such as morphine sulphate tablets or diconal tablets this might have caused Mr Williams' death in approximately the time frame in which it occurred. In this case, however, I would have expected Mr Williams perhaps to have felt dizzy and/or nauseated before unconsciousness and respiratory failure supervened and I might have expected him to want to lie down or to go to the bathroom'
.
In the opinion of Dr Grenville, the evidence suggests that it is likely that Mr Williams died of natural causes, although he could not exclude the possibility that Shipman administered a lethal dose of medication in tablet form.
Conclusion
The evidence from the police suggests strongly that Mr Williams' health was poor in the weeks before he died. The evidence of the pathologist, Dr Edwards, supports this. Although Mr Ormerod does not remember this, it seems likely that Mr Williams was suffering severe breathing problems in the period before he died.
The post-mortem report and the opinion of Professor Whitwell show that the findings were sufficient to account for a natural death. However, as toxicological tests were not carried out, the post-mortem findings do not exclude the possibility that Mr Williams' death was hastened by the giving of an inappropriate drug, either in tablet form or injectable form, or in both forms.
There is some evidence that Shipman did give Mr Williams some tablets that morning. We do not know what they were. If they were an opiate, they would be dangerous to Mr Williams, whose respiratory function was already compromised. He may also have given an injection when Mrs Williams was absent from the room.
If the doctor who had attended Mr Williams had not been Shipman, I would say without hesitation that it was highly likely that this was a completely natural death. However, it appears that Shipman did attend shortly before the death. We know that Shipman became a serial murderer. His method of killing was by the administration of opiates. We know that, at this time, he was abusing pethidine himself. It is quite possible that his judgement at this time was impaired. For those reasons, I feel unable to reach any conclusion about Shipman's rôle in this death. There is no positive evidence that he hastened the death but it is possible that he did and I am suspicious about it.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001