The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Jack Wills
Introduction
Mr Jack Wills died at his home, 16 Woodhouse Grove, Todmorden on Tuesday, 11th
March 1975 at the age of 65. He was registered as a patient with Dr John Dacre, a partner of Shipman at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Practice in Todmorden. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Wills' death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
Mr Wills' death was one of the 22 deaths for which the cause was certified by Shipman during his time in Todmorden. Following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's clinical audit in January 2001, the police investigated the death and took a statement from Mr Wills' daughter, Mrs Betty Dungworth.
No inquest was held at the time of Mr Wills' death but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
Mr Wills' medical records have not survived and, apart from the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), there is no relevant contemporaneous documentation.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Wills lived with his wife, Mrs Mavis Wills. His daughter, Mrs Dungworth, and her family lived in a house on the opposite side of Woodhouse Grove.
Mrs Dungworth described her father as having been very fit throughout his life, although he did suffer from gout from an early age. On about 6th
March 1975, Mr Wills suffered a heart attack. Dr Dacre saw him and gave him some medication. He told Mr Wills to rest in bed. Dr Dacre visited Mr Wills every day from the time of his heart attack until his death.
The Day of the Death
On 11th
March 1975, Mrs Dungworth visited her father at about 4.30pm, at which time he was asleep. Later that evening at about 6.45pm, Mrs Wills rushed across the road from her house to say that Mr Wills was in terrible pain and she thought that he was having another heart attack. Mrs Dungworth went across to her parents' house to find her father writhing in agony. A neighbour attended to see if first aid could be given but Mr Wills died.
Mrs Dungworth's husband tried in vain to contact a doctor. He went outside when a police car was passing and arrangements were made for a doctor to attend.
Shipman arrived at about 8pm that evening. He certified the fact of death and said that, in order to certify the cause of death, he would first need to speak to his partner, Dr Dacre. Mrs Dungworth recalls that Shipman dealt with the family very professionally and sympathetically.
Conclusion
I have no doubt that Mr Wills died from natural causes.
The death was investigated only because Shipman had certified the cause of death. There is no reason to suspect Shipman's involvement in the death and he was not involved in Mr Wills' treatment at any time.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001