The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Margaret Wilmore
Introduction
Mrs Margaret Wilmore died at her home, 21 Mount Pleasant Street, Portsmouth, Todmorden on Saturday, 27th
September 1975 at the age of 38. She was registered as a patient of Dr John Dacre, a partner of Shipman at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Practice. Following a post-mortem examination without inquest on 29th
September 1975, the Deputy Coroner for the Metropolitan District of Calderdale certified that the cause of Mrs Wilmore's death was heart failure due to coronary occlusion due to atheroma.
In October 2000, following publicity about Shipman's period of practice in Todmorden, Mrs Wilmore's daughter, Ms Janice Bailey, contacted the West Yorkshire Police to express concern about Mrs Wilmore's death. The police immediately investigated the death and concluded that there were no suspicious circumstances. In January 2001, the West Yorkshire Police were contacted by Mrs Wilmore's sister, Mrs Brenda Baynes, who also expressed concern as to the circumstances of Mrs Wilmore's death. The police discussed the death with Mrs Baynes but she had little information to offer as to the circumstances of her sister's death.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Ms Janice Bailey, from her sister, Ms Susan Bailey, and from Mrs Wilmore's husband, Mr Christopher Wilmore. The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths relating to Mrs Wilmore's death ('death certificate'), the Report of Death prepared by the West Yorkshire Constabulary, dated 27th
September 1975, and the post-mortem report prepared by Dr A T Edwards, consultant pathologist. Mrs Wilmore's medical records have not survived and there are no relevant surgery records.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr and Mrs Wilmore had four children. Mrs Wilmore worked as an assembler at a factory in Todmorden. Mr Wilmore says that his wife was generally quite healthy, although she did suffer from chest problems and also smoked. She suffered from nervous problems for which she attended her doctor quite regularly.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
On Friday, 26th
September 1975, Mrs Wilmore experienced severe chest pains whilst at work and came home early. She telephoned the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre and requested a visit. According to Mr Wilmore, Dr Dacre, the doctor with whom Mrs Wilmore was registered, came to the house and diagnosed bronchitis. He issued a prescription, which was collected by Mr and Mrs Wilmore's youngest daughter, Susan. She remembered that her sister complained that her chest was aching with coughing so much.
Ms Janice Bailey thinks, though she is unsure, that her mother told her that two doctors had visited her on 26th
September and that one of the doctors had said that she was suffering from bronchitis and had administered an injection in order to assist her breathing. She does not remember that her mother was coughing. Mr Wilmore states categorically that only one doctor attended on 26th
September, that the doctor was Dr Dacre and that he did not administer an injection. Mr Wilmore's account is consistent with that contained within the Report of Death, where it is stated:
'About one week ago she developed a cold and she complained of pains in the chest. The cold developed into Bronchitis and on Friday, the 26th
September, 1975, she was visited by Doctor Dacre who gave her a full examination and gave her a prescription for a medicine to combat this'
.
Mrs Wilmore's chest pains continued for the remainder of 26th
September, although they were less severe than they had been at first. She remained conscious and enjoyed watching television that night.
The Day of the Death
The Report of Death says only that Mr Wilmore found his wife
'apparently'
dead in bed when he woke at about 8.30am. A doctor was summoned. Shipman attended and confirmed that Mrs Wilmore was dead. He was unable to certify the cause of death and, as Dr Dacre was not available, the police were called and the death was referred to the coroner.
Mr Wilmore's recollection is slightly different. He remembers waking at 9am and going downstairs to make some tea. When he returned to the bedroom, Mrs Wilmore was kneeling on the floor, with the top half of her body lying over the bed. She called out to Mr Wilmore and then stopped breathing. An ambulance was called and arrived shortly thereafter, but the ambulance personnel were unable to resuscitate her.
Ms Janice Bailey remembers being told at the time that her mother had woken at about 8am and that, as she was still suffering from severe chest pains, she telephoned the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre to request a further visit. She remembers her parents tidying the house in preparation for the visit by the doctor. According to her recollection of what her father told her at the time, Mr Wilmore was walking upstairs when he heard Mrs Wilmore call out his name. He went into the bedroom where he found Mrs Wilmore shaking. After a short while, she stopped shaking and her body went limp. Ms Bailey herself remembers Mr Wilmore trying to resuscitate her mother by giving mouth-to-mouth resuscitation.
All the witnesses remember that Shipman arrived after the ambulance personnel and confirmed the fact of death. It is clear that Shipman was unable to certify the cause of death and, in the absence of Dr Dacre, the matter was reported to the coroner. Mrs Susan Bailey was upset and was abusive towards Shipman, telling him that he had arrived too late.
The Post-Mortem Report
At the post-mortem examination, the significant internal finding was severe bilateral pulmonary oedema which, in Dr Edwards' opinion, was due to acute left ventricular failure. Dr Edwards concluded that Mrs Wilmore had suffered heart failure due to coronary occlusion due to atheroma.
Conclusion
I have no doubt that Mrs Wilmore's death was natural. There is no evidence that Shipman attended Mrs Wilmore while she was still alive. It is clear that his only involvement was to attend after the death and to confirm the fact of death.
It appears to me that Ms Janice Bailey's recollection of attendance by two doctors is mistaken. Even if a second doctor had attended on 26th
September, and even if that doctor had been Shipman, and even if he had given Mrs Wilmore an injection, there is no reason to think that the injection caused or contributed to Mrs Wilmore's death. Mrs Wilmore was still alive in the early morning of 27th
September. She died suddenly in circumstances which suggest strongly that she had a heart attack. This was confirmed later by post-mortem examination.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001