The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The First Report
>
Alphabetical List of Cases
>
Colin Whitham
Introduction
Mr Colin Whitham died at his home, 21 Poplar Avenue, Todmorden on Tuesday, 23rd
July 1974 at the age of 26. He was registered as a patient with the Abraham Ormerod Medical Practice in Todmorden where, at this time, Shipman had been practising for about four months. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Whitham's death was choriocarcinoma due to teratoma of the testes.
Mr Whitham's death was one of the 22 deaths for which the cause was certified by Shipman during his time in Todmorden. Following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's clinical audit in January 2001, the police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Shirley McNicholas, Mr Whitham's widow.
No inquest was held at the time of Mr Whitham's death but an inquest into his death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
Mr Whitham's medical records have not survived and, apart from the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), there are no relevant contemporaneous documents.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Whitham married his wife, Shirley, in 1966 and they had four daughters. He worked as a plasterer.
In December 1973, Mr Whitham noticed a lump in his neck and was referred to a hospital in Halifax, where it was removed. Soon afterwards, he was diagnosed as suffering from lymph cancer. He was referred for treatment to the Charing Cross Hospital in London, but he was told that his illness was terminal and he came home to spend his remaining days with his family.
Mrs McNicholas remembers that she used to collect Mr Whitham's medication from the chemist, although she cannot remember what it was. She thinks that a doctor must have visited on occasion, but she cannot remember how frequently or which doctor it was. Before the death, the cancer had spread all over Mr Whitham's body and he was very ill.
The Day of the Death
Mr Whitham died at home in the early hours of 23rd
July. Present at the death were Mrs McNicholas and Mr Whitham's parents, who are both now dead. Mrs McNicholas recalls that her mother-in-law called for a doctor and that a doctor came to examine the body. She cannot remember who the doctor was. She recalls that the doctor arranged for an undertaker to remove the body. Her recollection of these events is hazy, as she was extremely distressed.
The death was expected and no member of the family ever had any cause to suspect that the death was other than natural.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death, on which he would have stated when he had last seen Mr Whitham alive. Unfortunately, neither the certificate nor its counterfoil has survived. As Mr Whitham was buried, there are no cremation documents. There is therefore no evidence of when Shipman last saw Mr Whitham alive.
Conclusion
This death was investigated only because Shipman had certified the cause of death.
In the absence of the medical records, it is not possible to discover what medication Mr Whitham was taking before his death. If, as Mrs McNicholas remembers, the cancer had spread, it is likely that Mr Whitham was in pain and would have required pain-relieving drugs. It would not be unusual in circumstances of this kind for a doctor to attend daily to give an injection. It is possible that this was so in Mr Whitham's case but that Mrs McNicholas has forgotten. It is also possible that tablets provided sufficient pain relief.
There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman visited Mr Whitham shortly before his death. However, Mrs McNicholas' recollection is understandably hazy and I do not feel able to rule out the possibility that Shipman was at the house in the period before death. It follows that, although the death was expected, and, although the family has never had any cause for concern about this death, I cannot rule out the possibility that Shipman might have hastened Mr Whitham's death by injecting him with an excessive dose of opiate. If one were dealing with any doctor other than Shipman, I would say that I was quite sure that Mr Whitham's death was natural. But Shipman did become a serial murderer and used injected opiates as his method of killing. It seems to me, however, that, if Shipman did hasten the death, he could only have shortened Mr Whitham's life by a very little.
My conclusion is that Mr Whitham almost certainly died solely as the result of his cancer but I cannot rule out the possibility that Shipman might have hastened his death by a short period.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001