The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Edward Walker
Introduction
Mr Edward Walker died at Scaitcliffe Hall, a residential home for the elderly, Todmorden on Saturday, 25th
January 1975 at the age of 70. He was registered as a patient of Dr John Dacre, a partner of Shipman at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Walker's death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. Mr Walker was buried.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions at Preston Crown Court, Mrs Phyllis Walker, Mr Walker's daughter-in-law, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of his death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Walker and from Mrs Nancy Mary Harris, the former matron at Scaitcliffe Hall.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Walker but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Walker, Mrs Harris, Dr Dacre and Mr Ronald Clifford, a former gardener and handyman at Scaitcliffe Hall. Mrs Walker's husband, Mr Thomas Albert Walker, died in June 1988. Apart from the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), no other relevant contemporaneous documentation survives.
Mrs Walker gave evidence at an oral hearing on 8th
November 2001. Mrs Harris is 86 years old and lives in a retirement home in Plymouth. According to her general practitioner, she was unfit to travel to Manchester.
Personal Background
Mr Walker worked as a farm labourer for most of his life. Mrs Walker says that he was always fit and healthy, save that he suffered from epilepsy. However, his fits were of the petit mal type. He was a pipe smoker and used to mix coltsfoot leaves with his tobacco, as he believed these were good for his chest. More than 20 years before his own death, Mr Walker's wife died, and over the years he became aggressive and volatile. He quarrelled with his family and moved away from the Todmorden area to live in Bacup. He remained estranged from the family for many years.
In 1972, Mr Walker was admitted to hospital in Rochdale. He was drinking heavily and neglecting himself. The health authority asked Mr and Mrs Thomas Walker if they were prepared to take Mr Walker in, to live with them. They were not, but they made arrangements for him to rent a cottage at Shaw Wood Road, Springside in Todmorden. They resumed normal family relations and kept a general eye on him. He was quite able to look after himself but did not do so and the house gradually became uninhabitable. Also, he became progressively more bad-tempered and violent. He quarrelled with his son and then eventually with his daughter-in-law. He drank heavily and neglected himself. The Walkers became very concerned about him.
In October 1974, according to Mrs Walker, Dr Dacre examined Mr Walker and said that he was generally in good health and had a 'strong heart'. Dr Dacre has been asked about this and he has no recollection of Mr Walker at all. Despite this apparent clean bill of health, Dr Dacre decided that, due to his self-neglect, Mr Walker should live in a residential home. Soon afterwards, Mr Walker moved into Scaitcliffe Hall, where Mr and Mrs Thomas Walker used to visit him about twice a week.
The Day before and the Day of the Death
Mr and Mrs Thomas Walker called to visit Mr Walker at Scaitcliffe Hall on Friday, 24th
January 1975, the day before he died. Mr Walker expressed a strong wish to return to his own cottage. Mr and Mrs Thomas Walker told him that he could not as it had been let to someone else. Mr Walker was angry and upset and there was a row. Mr and Mrs Walker accepted the matron's suggestion that they should leave and return the following day. Mrs Walker says that when they left the home, her father-in-law was 'as fit and healthy as he had always been'.
Mrs Walker recalls that at about 9am the following morning, soon after she had arrived at work, she received a telephone message and learned that her father-in-law had died in the night. She and her husband immediately went to the home. Mrs Harris told her that Mr Walker had died of a heart attack. She said that Shipman had been called out. Mrs Walker says that it was not clear to her whether Shipman had been called out before the death to attend to Mr Walker or whether he had only been called after the death had been discovered. The undertakers had already removed his body. In her statement to the police, Mrs Walker said that at the time, the news that Mr Walker had died of a heart attack came as a great shock to her, as her father-in-law had never suffered from heart problems. In her statement to the Inquiry, Mrs Walker said that when she was told by Mrs Harris that her father-in-law had suffered a heart attack, she replied that he could not have done as Dr Dacre had told her that he had a strong heart. According to Mrs Walker, Mrs Harris insisted that he had a bad heart and that Dr Dacre was mistaken. However, when Mrs Walker came to give oral evidence to the Inquiry, she said there was no discussion about what Dr Dacre had said about her father-in-law's heart. Mrs Walker said that Mrs Harris had told her that her father-in-law would not have been able to stay at the home as he was disruptive.
Mrs Harris has told the Inquiry that she has a 'hazy' recollection of Mr Walker, although she does not remember anything specifically about him. She cannot remember whether he was especially disruptive or anything about his state of health. She does not remember Shipman attending to certify Mr Walker's death. Mrs Harris does not recall speaking to Mrs Walker or her husband, although she accepts that she may have done. In her police statement she stated that she remembered Shipman attending at Scaitcliffe Hall on one occasion, although she could not remember if that was to see Mr Walker. On that occasion Shipman was present at the home for only a short time.
Scaitcliffe Hall was served by the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre and Dr David Bunn and Shipman had a rota for their routine visits there. Whoever attended on the night of Mr Walker's death would have done so as the emergency on-call doctor. We know that it was not Dr Dacre, because we have his 'on call' book, which contains no reference to any visit. It seems most likely that it was Shipman because it was he who certified the cause of death.
Mr Clifford remembers Shipman would visit the home about once a month, although he cannot recall which patients Shipman came to see. Mr Clifford has no recollection of Mr Walker or anything about his health or the circumstances of his death.
The Medical Evidence
Mr Walker's medical records are not available to the Inquiry. Therefore expert medical opinion has not been obtained. Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry, has confirmed that drinking heavily is not a risk factor associated with ischaemic heart disease or coronary thrombosis.
Conclusion
I am unable to reach any conclusion as to the circumstances of this death. The medical records have not survived. There are no records from Scaitcliffe Hall. There is no cremation certificate. Mrs Walker's recollection is not clear, which is not surprising as these events occurred over 27 years ago. There is no evidence that Shipman saw Mr Walker in the last hour or minutes of his life. He might have done; he might not. There is no medical evidence from which I can form any view as to the likelihood of a natural death. If this case involved any doctor other than Shipman, I would say that there was no reason to suspect foul play and it would follow that the death was almost certainly natural. However, as Shipman was to become a serial murderer, some suspicion is bound to arise in any case in which he might have had access to a patient shortly before death. Although there is no evidence that Shipman killed Mr Walker, I cannot say that he did not. I can reach no decision.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001