The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Winifred Mary Walker
Introduction
Mrs Winifred Mary Walker died at The Lakes, a residential and nursing home for the elderly, Boyds Walk, Dukinfield in the early hours of Sunday, 4th
November 1990 at the age of 75. She had been a patient of Shipman since he began practising at the Donneybrook Surgery in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was pancreatic cancer.
In February 2000, shortly after Shipman's conviction at Preston Crown Court, Mr Peter Walker, one of Mrs Walker's sons, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of his mother's death. The police investigated the death and took witness statements from Mr Walker, Mrs Annice May Walker (his wife), Mr Geoffrey Walker (his brother) and Mr Jack Meredith (the company director for The Lakes). An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry took further statements from all those witnesses and all save Mr Meredith gave evidence at an oral hearing on 2nd
November 2001. The Inquiry also took statements from several members of the nursing home staff, Mrs Dorothea Mary Curran, Mrs Lorraine Lowe-Jones, Mrs Angela Newman, Mrs Sheila Ann Fraser and Mrs Judith Ann Shaw, who formerly managed the home. The first three of these gave oral evidence at the hearing. Finally, the Inquiry took a statement from Mr John Derek Walker, Mrs Walker's grandson, but he was not asked to give evidence.
The Inquiry obtained Mrs Walker's computerised and handwritten general practitioner notes. The Lakes provided their records, which included Mrs Walker's nursing care plan, admission records, daily evaluation reports and fluid balance and turning charts. The Visitors' Book and other general documents have not been found and have probably been destroyed.
Personal Background
It would seem from her medical records that, until 1990, Mrs Walker had enjoyed reasonably good health for much of her life and there were sometimes quite long intervals between her visits to the doctor. Mr Geoffrey Walker recalls that his mother suffered from a condition which he thinks was called 'tropical paralysis', which caused extreme breathlessness. There is no reference to this in the medical notes. This does not matter as the circumstances of Mrs Walker's death arise from her development of carcinoma of the pancreas in the late summer of 1990.
The medical records for this period are extremely sparse. The last handwritten record is dated September 1990 and there are only a few computerised records after that date. However, the story of Mrs Walker's illness can be gleaned from various letters written to Shipman by the medical staff at Tameside General Hospital.
In August 1990, Mrs Walker was admitted to the hospital with a chest infection which caused breathlessness and pleuritic pain. She was treated with intravenous antibiotics; her condition improved and she was allowed home. At the beginning of September, Mr William Samarji, a consultant surgeon at the hospital, visited Mrs Walker at home at Shipman's request. She gave a history of jaundice, poor appetite and weight loss. Examination showed that she was frail and deeply jaundiced. She was investigated as an outpatient and an ultrasound scan revealed a carcinoma at the head of the pancreas. On 17th
September 1990, Mr Samarji wrote to Shipman to explain that a palliative operation was indicated, that Mrs Walker was not keen on going into hospital, and to ask Shipman to explain the situation to Mrs Walker.
There is no note of any discussion having taken place but, on 24th
September 1990, Mrs Walker was admitted to Tameside General Hospital and had her operation. The hospital notes are no longer available. Mrs Walker was discharged on 20th
October 1990.
Mrs Walker had not been told the nature of her condition and did not know that she had terminal cancer. The family was fully informed and knew that the prognosis was poor. Mr Peter Walker said that he was told that his mother might live for as long as six months but could die at any time.
Mrs Walker needed nursing care and her family wanted her to be admitted to The Lakes, but there was no vacancy. Accordingly Mrs Walker was admitted to the Pennine View Nursing Home, which was under the same management as The Lakes. Four days later, on 24th
October, a vacancy arose at The Lakes and Mrs Walker was transferred.
Mrs Walker's Stay at The Lakes
The Lakes comprised both a nursing home and a residential home, housed in separate buildings. Mrs Walker was in the nursing home, which was staffed by qualified nurses assisted by unqualified care assistants. I have seen the records kept by the staff and they appear, on the face of it, to be of a high quality. An admission record sets out Mrs Walker's condition on 24th
October and puts beyond doubt that she was in poor health and needed assistance with all aspects of daily living. It was recognised that she was there for terminal care. The notes say that she was to be given TLC (tender loving care). The daily notes, called Evaluation Sheets, purported to contain a running record of everything of significance that happened in connection with Mrs Walker. From these sheets, it can be seen that Mrs Walker was not well enough to leave her room and, certainly after the first day or two, did not leave her bed, save to sit in a chair while her bedding was changed. She had lost her appetite and her general condition deteriorated day by day. A fluid balance chart recorded her intake and output, which was through a free-draining catheter. She was incontinent and had bedsores, which required regular dressing. She was turned regularly to prevent these from worsening.
There are also records of the drugs that Mrs Walker received. A chart in the nursing notes recorded the instructions that the doctor had given. A Drug Recording Sheet was used to record each individual administration of a drug and this was also recorded on the Evaluation Sheets. The administration of a controlled drug was supposed to be underlined on the Evaluation Sheets.
The practice at the home was that, when a doctor visited, he or she was to be escorted to the patient by a qualified nurse, unless that proved impracticable. The fact of the visit and any instructions given by the doctor were to be recorded on the Evaluation Sheet and if a prescription was given, that also was to be entered on the prescriptions chart.
It is not necessary for the purposes of this decision to record each occurrence during the eleven days that elapsed between Mrs Walker's admission on 24th
October and her death in the early hours of 4th
November. Suffice it to say that, at the time of her admission, Mrs Walker was on a course of antibiotics for a chest infection and was taking a diuretic to control the congestive heart disease from which she was also suffering. She had a prescription for morphine sulphate in a slow-release preparation in tablet form, called MST. She was to take 10mg twice a day for pain relief. The nursing notes say that, on 25th
October, a Dr Hague visited. This may be a mistake as there was no Dr Hague at Donneybrook. The doctor who attended promised to visit again on the following Monday or Tuesday. In fact, Shipman came on the Monday and directed that the prescription for the diuretic should be discontinued, presumably as there was a risk that Mrs Walker was becoming dehydrated. He also discontinued the prescription for MST tablets and substituted morphine elixir. This was morphine in liquid form. The dose was to be 10mg of morphine in 5ml of liquid, taken twice a day. The dose had not been increased; only the form of the drug had changed. On Wednesday, 31st
October, Shipman visited again, in the afternoon. The staff had observed further deterioration and Shipman increased the morphine dose to 10mg, four times daily. He said he would visit again on the Friday. That visit and the instructions given are fully recorded. There is no suggestion that Shipman visited on the Thursday. Mrs Walker continued to deteriorate gradually.
There is some uncertainty about the events of Friday, 2nd
November. The nursing notes contain no reference to a visit by Shipman. However, Shipman himself was to later say on the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) that it was on that day that he had last seen Mrs Walker alive. Mr Geoffrey Walker thinks that Shipman visited Mrs Walker on that Friday.
It is clear from the nursing notes for Friday, 2nd
November that the staff formed the view that Mrs Walker had deteriorated to such an extent that the family must be warned that her death might be imminent.
Mr Geoffrey Walker recalls that he received a message while at work that morning and was told to attend at The Lakes without delay. He had no personal means of transport and his supervisor drove him to The Lakes. He found his mother drifting in and out of consciousness and moaning from time to time. In his oral evidence he said that later in the morning a doctor attended. Mr Walker did not know this doctor, but after seeing Shipman on television he believes that it was he. The doctor said that he was going to give Mrs Walker an injection. The curtains were pulled round the bed and Mr Geoffrey Walker did not see what was done. He assumed that an injection was given. The doctor said that Mrs Walker 'won't be long now' and advised the family to listen for changes in her breathing. Mr Geoffrey Walker thinks that his brother Peter had not arrived at that time. When Mr Geoffrey Walker gave a statement to the police he did not mention the attendance of a doctor on Friday, 2nd
November. When he gave a statement to the Inquiry, he said that a doctor attended that day and advised the relatives present that Mrs Walker would not live long and that they should listen for changes in her breathing. It was not until he gave oral evidence that he said anything about an injection being given on the Friday. I am doubtful of the accuracy of Mr Geoffrey Walker's present recollection.
Mrs Annice Walker has no recollection of being summoned to the home that morning. She says that she was there at some stage and her mother-in-law was in reasonable condition, able to sit up and talk and eat food. She did not say that she felt ill and she did not complain of being in any pain. Mrs Annice Walker did not see a doctor attending her mother-in-law on the Friday. She says that she stayed the night at the home on the Friday but does not offer an explanation as to why that was appropriate. Her evidence is that her mother-in-law's quite stable condition continued until well into the next day. I am quite sure her recollection is at fault.
Mr Peter Walker has no recollection of being summoned to the home on the Friday although he says he was there, certainly in the early evening. He did not see a doctor that day. He recalls that he was there at about 7pm when his son, John, arrived at the home and told Mrs Walker about the birth of her great-grandchild, the news of which she appeared to understand. However, Mr John Walker says that he did not arrive until about 8.20pm. He came to tell his grandmother about the new baby and her response was to say 'God bless you all'. Mr Peter Walker recalls that he left the home to go to a business meeting and did not return until about 9.30am the following morning.
As Mrs Walker was still alive on the morning of Saturday, 3rd
November, the questions of whether or not Shipman visited on the Friday and whether or not he gave an injection are of no great significance. I am inclined to think that he did visit on the Friday, although I am doubtful as to whether he gave an injection. The nursing notes record that Mrs Walker received four doses of morphine elixir during the 24-hour period and do not suggest that this dose of analgesic was inadequate. If Shipman did indeed visit on the Friday, this demonstrates that the Evaluation Sheets are not always accurate, as the visit is not recorded there.
The Events Leading up to Death
Mrs Walker was still alive on the morning of Saturday, 3rd
November. There is a wealth of evidence about the events of this day. It is the family's case that Shipman attended at about lunchtime and gave Mrs Walker an injection. After that, it is said that her condition changed noticeably. She began to hallucinate and later went into a coma from which she did not emerge. She died in the early hours of the following morning.
The nursing notes record that Mrs Walker was given morphine elixir at 2.25am. Her relatives had stayed the night. She was taking only a few sips of water. She was turned every two hours. Her sacral dressings were intact. At 8.35am, she was given another dose of morphine. She was taking very little fluid. Her relatives were with her. She was being turned every two hours but was protesting when turned. Otherwise she seemed comfortable. No record was made in the Evaluation Sheet at or about 2pm but a handwritten fluid balance chart shows that Mrs Walker took sips of liquid and was turned then and at 4.30pm. There is no reference to the visit of a doctor or to the administration of any morphine whether orally or by injection. At 8pm, the notes record that at 6pm the relatives had asked that Mrs Walker should not be turned. They had also asked that she should not be given morphine at 8pm. Otherwise, she continued to deteriorate and was taking very little fluid. This entry is signed by a nurse whose name appears to be Joyce. Unfortunately, it has not been possible to locate this nurse and the other nurses who have given evidence to the Inquiry cannot remember her. They think she must have been a temporary nurse, working 'on the bank'.
If those notes are accurate and complete, they exclude any visit by Shipman on that day and they do not suggest any change in Mrs Walker's condition other than a progressive, gradual, terminal decline. They suggest that her family was sensitive to her predicament and recognised that her death was imminent.
The final series of notes records the death at 12.30am on 4th
November, in the presence of relatives. Shipman was notified soon afterwards. A Dr Osei of Salford attended at 1.35am to certify the fact of death. A letter, addressed to Shipman, was given to one of Mrs Walker's sons. The funeral directors were instructed, and attended to remove the body at 2.30am.
Mr Peter Walker says that he arrived at the home at about 9.30am on the Saturday. He says that his mother was well, sitting up in bed wearing a nightdress and bedjacket. They talked. She told him that he should go back to work and not to bother about her. He pointed out that it was a lovely day and she looked out and agreed. He had promised to bring her some tinned rice pudding but had forgotten to do so. He apologised and she told him not to worry. Although this recollection would suggest that Mrs Walker was quite well, Mr Peter Walker accepts that his mother was taking only sips of liquid and may well have been in pain when she was turned in bed. I am quite sure that Mrs Walker was extremely ill at this time.
Mr Peter Walker says that at about lunchtime a nurse came into the room and told the family that they must leave the room as the doctor was coming. The family went out into the corridor. A doctor came along, carrying a folder of papers and a syringe. He went into the room and when he came out he disappeared without speaking to the family at all. Mr Peter Walker says that he asked the nurse whether and why the doctor had given an injection; she replied that she did not know but she supposed it was to calm Mrs Walker down. The nurse had not been in the room with the doctor. Mr Peter Walker says he assumed the doctor must have given an injection and wondered why, as his mother had not been in any pain. When the family went back into the room, after about an hour, according to Mr Peter Walker's oral evidence, Mrs Walker began to hallucinate and became very restless. She was ripping up paper tissues. After a while she went into a coma, from which she never recovered. Mr Peter Walker has no recollection of asking that she should not be turned or given morphine in the evening. He says that later in the day his mother's breathing changed and she was gasping for breath. Soon after midnight, he was called into the room and was there to see his mother take her last breath. He did not stay long after that and was not there when a doctor from the deputising service came to confirm the fact that Mrs Walker had died.
Mr Peter Walker says that, at the time, he was concerned that Shipman had contributed to or hastened his mother's death. He did not say anything to the staff at the home but did mention it to his brother.
Mr Geoffrey Walker says that he was at the nursing home for most of the Saturday. At times his mother was hallucinating and her breathing seemed to be 'short'. She was drifting into a deeper sleep. Even in the morning, he thought she was in a coma. In his oral evidence he said that a doctor visited at about lunchtime. A nurse came in and asked the family to leave while the doctor gave an injection. They all got up and left. The doctor came past them carrying a saucer with a cover over it. He assumed that the saucer must have been connected with the injection. He agreed that when he had made his statement to the police he had not mentioned the saucer. At that time, he said that the doctor had not been carrying anything. There might have been some reference to an injection but he was not sure. At the hearing, he said that he was sure that the evidence he was then giving was right. He had discussed the incident often with his wife and now remembered things he had not remembered when he spoke to the police. When the family went back into the room after the doctor had given the injection, his mother seemed restless and his brother Peter was annoyed because he thought the doctor had disturbed his mother. After a while, his mother was shouting out, 'let me go, let me go'. He did not recall asking that his mother should not be given a dose of morphine in the evening or asking that she should not be turned. He went home in the early evening for a shower and returned to the home. His mother remained in a coma and died soon after midnight. He remembers a doctor who was not Shipman coming to certify the death.
Mrs Annice Walker told the Inquiry that her mother-in-law had been 'alright' when she arrived at the home at about 10am on the Saturday morning. She was talking and shouting at Mr Peter Walker, telling him to get back to work and enquiring about the rest of the family. Then, at some point before lunch, while Mrs Walker was having a sleep, Shipman came to see her. He entered the room carrying a brown folder, Mrs Annice Walker said, with something else in his hands. She only found out that this was a syringe when her husband, Mr Peter Walker, told her, some time later. The doctor remained alone with Mrs Walker for 'a couple of minutes' and then left. After that, Mrs Annice Walker went back into the room and propped her mother-in-law up on her pillows. Mrs Walker then began to hallucinate. Then she went quiet. Mrs Annice Walker left the nursing home later that day and did not return that evening. She knew nothing of Mrs Walker being given oral morphine or of any request that she should not have it that evening. She remembers that, when her husband returned home, he was shocked and angry. He was convinced that the injection that Shipman had given had killed Mrs Walker. They had not expected her to die when she did. Her husband had remained of this view over the years and had 'driven her mad' speaking of it.
The Aftermath
Mr Geoffrey Walker, who met Dr Osei, says that the doctor told him that he would be unable to certify the cause of Mrs Walker's death. He believed that his brother Peter did not wish that there should be a post-mortem examination and it was therefore necessary that Shipman should sign the MCCD. To that end, Mr Geoffrey Walker went to the Donneybrook Surgery on the Monday morning and asked to see Shipman. Another doctor told him that Shipman was on holiday. When Mr Walker explained the problem, the doctor promised to arrange for Shipman to sign the MCCD; this was done, and Mr Peter Walker was able to collect it the following day.
Shipman's personal visits book confirms Mr Geoffrey Walker's recollection that Shipman was off work that week, in fact from Saturday, 3rd
November. However, it appears that he signed the MCCD on Monday, 5th
November.
The same visits book confirms a visit on 25th
October (the day on which the Evaluation Sheets suggest a visit by 'Dr Hague'), 29th
and 31st
October (both of which are confirmed in the Evaluation Sheets) and, most importantly, 2nd
November. From 3rd
November, Shipman was off work.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. The certificate itself has not survived; only the counterfoil has been found. The counterfoil suggests that Shipman last saw Mrs Walker on Friday, 2nd
November 1990. He filled it in on Monday, 5th
November.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Walker had died, as she did, at 12.30am on 4th
November. He said that he had been her ordinary medical attendant for 13 years, which was true. He also said that he had attended her during her last illness, which was cancer of the head of the pancreas, for two months, which was also true.
Shipman himself apparently made no entry confirming when he had last seen Mrs Walker alive. In different handwriting, probably that of the medical referee or a member of her staff, it is said that it was established 'by phone' that this was on 30th
October 1990, which was the Tuesday before the death. On any view, that seems to be wrong. No one suggests Shipman visited Mrs Walker on that day.
Shipman said that he conducted a complete external examination of the body, which he first saw about 36 hours after the death. The cause of death was carcinoma of the head of the pancreas. He said that the mode of death was coma lasting about two days. He said that he was relying on his own observations and also statements made by the staff at the nursing home to reach his views as to the cause and mode of death.
Shipman went on to describe the operation (cholecystojejunostomy) that Mrs Walker had undergone for relief of her jaundice. He related, correctly, that she had been nursed during her last illness by the staff at The Lakes. He said that
'Family son/daughter'
were present at the death.
Mr Peter Walker disagrees strongly with the suggestion that Mrs Walker had been in a coma for two days before she died. On the morning of 3rd
November, she was talking and taking drinks of water, according to his recollection.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker did not regard the case as suspicious either on the basis of the cremation documents or on the basis of the medical notes and records, which were recovered from Shipman's house in a Kleenex box.
On 7th
December 2001, Dr John Grenville was asked about this case at an oral hearing. He was asked to assume that the accounts of Mr Peter Walker and his wife Mrs Annice Walker were correct and that Shipman gave Mrs Walker an injection at about lunchtime on the Saturday. He was asked whether Mrs Walker's condition after the injection, as they described it, could have been due to the injection being of morphine or other opiate. He said that the description of her condition was consistent with the gradual development of a confusional state and was not consistent with the administration of an excessive dose of opiate. Had Mrs Walker been given an excessive dose of opiate, he would have expected her to become very sleepy and then to be less sleepy as the effect of the opiate wore off. This was not what Mr and Mrs Walker described.
Conclusion
I think Shipman probably did visit Mrs Walker on Friday, 2nd
November, even though no visit is recorded in the Evaluation Sheets. I say that because I am satisfied that Shipman was taking a week's leave, starting on the Saturday. Friday would be his last chance to visit Mrs Walker, who he knew was close to death. He had promised to visit on the Friday. Mr Geoffrey Walker, whose evidence I found the most reliable of all the family witnesses, said that Shipman visited that day. Initially he had not said that Shipman gave an injection although later he was to assert that an injection was given. I think it is unlikely although possible that Shipman gave Mrs Walker an injection on that day. She had quite large quantities of morphine elixir and there is no evidence that she was suffering from breakthrough pain. If he did give an injection, it is plain that it did not cause Mrs Walker's death, as she lived for about 36 hours afterwards.
I find that Shipman probably did not visit Mrs Walker on Saturday, 3rd
November. For one thing, he was on leave, although probably spending it at home. It would have been possible for him to visit. More importantly, I find the evidence of the family unsatisfactory. They have clearly persuaded themselves and each other that Shipman visited that day. Their accounts have changed considerably over the course of the two investigations and the hearing.
Even if Shipman did attend on Saturday, 3rd
November and even if he gave an injection, it is quite clear that that injection did not cause Mrs Walker's death. Mrs Walker lived for about 12 hours after that injection was given, if it ever was. Dr Grenville and Professor Henry McQuay have said in their generic evidence that, if a lethal dose of strong opiate is given intravenously, the patient will be unconscious within a few seconds and will be dead within about five minutes. If a lethal dose is given intramuscularly, the patient will be dead within about an hour. Dr Grenville has also said that Mrs Walker's state of confusion on the Saturday afternoon was not indicative of or compatible with an overdose of opiate.
I have considered the possibility that Shipman gave a massive dose of a sedative drug such as Largactil. I rule this out as well. A massive dose of sedative would have sent Mrs Walker into a deep sleep for several hours. According to the family, she was confused and restless after the injection.
I am quite sure that Mrs Walker died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001