The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Minnie Ward
Introduction
Mrs Minnie Ward died at Laurel Bank, a residential home for the elderly, Knott Lane, Gee Cross, Hyde on Thursday, 18th
April 1996 at the age of 104. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. As Shipman's oldest patient, she cut the ribbon at the opening ceremony of the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was old age.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the available medical records, Mrs Ward's death was moderately suspicious. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Kathleen Mary Kenworthy (Mrs Ward's daughter), Mr Thomas Kenworthy (Mrs Kenworthy's husband) and Mr Mark John Shockledge (the general manager at Laurel Bank).
An inquest into Mrs Ward's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mrs Kenworthy, focusing mainly on the death of her father who died in 1983. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Ward's general practitioner records and to the appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained the Laurel Bank diary, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation, as well as dockets from the deputising doctor service, Healthcall. A report has been obtained from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Ward enjoyed good physical health for most of her life, although she suffered from tinnitus and sporadic depression in her early life. She remained independent in her own home until 1995. By this time, she was finding it increasingly difficult to move about the house and, in November 1995, she moved to Laurel Bank. After that, she became even less mobile and, by the time of her death, was using a wheelchair. She had a persistent cough.
The handwritten and computerised records for 15th
February 1996 reveal that Mrs Ward had a suspected deep vein thrombosis for which she was provided with an elasticated stocking. On 3rd
April, she had a urinary tract infection for which amoxycillin, an antibiotic, was prescribed.
The Laurel Bank diary suggests that on 7th
April 1996, Mrs Ward fell out of bed at night. This fall is also recorded in a Healthcall note, which suggests that she was cut and bruised. Her condition during the following week does not seem to have given rise to any great concern, although she had some breathing problems and back pain.
The Laurel Bank diary shows that Shipman saw Mrs Ward on 11th
April 1996, but not thereafter. It appears that he was not concerned about her condition at that time. However, the note suggests that he had said that he would not suggest any further treatment. This visit is recorded in Mrs Ward's computerised records, where the entry says:
'all ok w&s'
. I do not understand what this means. Shipman seems to have decided that he should wait and see because everything was alright.
Mr Shockledge told the police that he saw Mrs Ward on most days. He remembers that shortly before her death, her chest was bad and she had difficulty with breathing. At Shipman's visit on 11th
April, he wanted Mrs Ward to continue taking her usual medication. Mr Shockledge says that whenever Shipman visited a resident, a senior member of staff would always accompany him. Entry to the home was protected by a secure entry system. The implication is that Shipman did not visit Mrs Ward again after 11th
April, as no further visit is recorded in the daily diary.
The Laurel Bank diary corroborates the witness evidence to the effect that Mrs Ward had problems with her chest. On 17th
April 1996, she had a sore throat and problems with phlegm and was given menthol crystals to inhale. Mrs Kenworthy visited her mother that day and noticed that her mother's ankles and lower legs were quite swollen. She also appeared to be drowsy and her breathing was noisy. She managed to eat a pear and drink some tea but, at 6pm, she was dropping off to sleep.
Mrs Kenworthy told the Inquiry that, after her mother's death, she asked Shipman why her mother's legs had become so swollen shortly before she died. Shipman said that this was because he had stopped the tablets that he had originally prescribed, which he did not believe were having any effect. Dr Grenville has addressed this element of the management of Mrs Ward.
The Day of the Death
The following entry appears in the Laurel Bank diary for 18th
April 1996:
'NCA's
(
Nursing Care Assistants
)
had to get me up at 5.15AM Minnie
not looking to
(
sic
)
good, colour greyish looking
breathing quite laboured, complete bed change.
All Minnies chest wet smelt as though she
had been sick & not very coherent, chest
sounds very thick and ruckly although she
has brought quite a lot of Phlem
(
sic
)
up in last
24 HRS. will OBS & probably get GP in
just to check her over, I don't feel too
happy about her condition'
.
There is then an entry recording that Mrs Ward had died:
'C/A
(
care assistant
)
SHOUTED US @ 8.15
MINNIE HAS PASSED AWAY
KATHLEEN CONTACTED
DR SHIPMAN CONTACTED
DR SHIPMAN VISITED, HE
THINKS THAT THE CAUSE OF
HER DEATH IS DUE TO HER
AGE AND THE FACT THAT
HER BODY HAS FAILED'
.
There are then further entries detailing the attendance of the family and the undertakers.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD, dating it 18th
April 1996. He certified that Mrs Ward had died on that day and that the cause of death was 'old age'. He said that he had last seen Mrs Ward alive on 13th
April. This is not consistent with either the medical records or the Laurel Bank diary, both of which suggest that he had last seen her alive on 11th
April. Shipman said that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination.
The Expert Evidence
Following his consideration of the medical records, Professor Baker assessed the level of suspicion as moderate, probably on the basis that the death seemed quite sudden, despite Mrs Ward's advanced years.
Dr Grenville has reviewed Mrs Ward's medical records and has told the Inquiry that she was a very elderly lady who had suffered from severe depression for many years. She had been treated with digoxin and frusemide for congestive heart failure since about 1986. On 4th
October 1984, her medication record shows that she was being prescribed digoxin 62.5 micrograms daily and frusemide 20mg daily. These are both very small doses and Dr Grenville has told the Inquiry that this was appropriate treatment because unwanted effects and drug interactions become more common and more dangerous with the ageing process. A handwritten note, made by Shipman and dated 14th
June 1995, records that he had advised Mrs Ward to stop the digoxin and to take Lasix. Lasix is the trade name for frusemide and it seems that Shipman advised Mrs Ward to take an occasional tablet as required, presumably if her ankles swelled or if she became short of breath. Dr Grenville regarded this as a reasonable strategy in the treatment of a lady of Mrs Ward's age.
Dr Grenville has observed that it is apparent from the Laurel Bank diary that Mrs Ward was unwell for the two weeks before her death. She had been suffering from a chest infection for several days before she died and was known to have a degree of heart failure. In Dr Grenville's opinion, at the age of 104, the chest infection would probably have put a strain on Mrs Ward's heart leading to her death. Dr Grenville has told the Inquiry that, although this is the most likely cause of death, it cannot be more than supposition and he feels it was reasonable of Shipman to certify the cause of her death as old age.
Dr Grenville does not believe that the alterations to Mrs Ward's medication contributed in any way to her death.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Ward died as the result of natural causes.
The Laurel Bank diary is plainly a contemporaneous record of events and I am confident of its accuracy. It is clear from the diary that Mrs Ward became unwell in the last week or two of her life. She had reached a very great age and had suffered from congestive heart failure for some time. When she developed a chest infection, it is not surprising that she succumbed quite quickly. Although her death seemed quite sudden, I do not think it could be said to be unexpected from a medical point of view.
It seems clear to me that Shipman last saw Mrs Ward on 11th
April, a week before her death. It is possible, but unlikely, that he made a later visit. It is clear that the staff at the home were concerned about Mrs Ward's deteriorating condition in the night before she died, but there is no evidence that Shipman was called or that he visited.
Mrs Kenworthy expressed concern that Shipman may have contributed to her mother's death by changing her medication inappropriately. The evidence of Dr Grenville, however, makes it clear that Shipman's treatment of Mrs Ward was appropriate in this case and that the change to her medication regime in no way contributed to her death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001