The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Kathleen May Wass
Introduction
Miss Kathleen May Wass died at Laurel Bank, a residential home for the elderly, Knott Lane, Gee Cross, Hyde on Thursday, 2nd
November 1995 at the age of 87. She had been a patient of Shipman since May 1993. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the information contained in the medical records, Miss Wass' death was moderately suspicious. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Miss Wass' sister, Mrs Betty Rosemary Sleigh. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Sleigh and her son, Mr Roger Kirby. The Inquiry has had access to Miss Wass' general practitioner and hospital records, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Laurel Bank diary, Healthcall records and the appointments sheets and visits book and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained two reports from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Wass never married and worked as an optician's receptionist until she retired at the age of 80. She appears to have enjoyed good health for most of her life. She was said to have been suffering from hypertension and congestive heart failure in 1951. However, there is no evidence that those conditions persisted. In 1993, she was becoming confused and was admitted to Tameside General Hospital for assessment. During this admission, a chest x-ray showed an enlarged heart with changes in the lungs suggestive of chronic obstructive airways disease. She had been a smoker for many years. It was decided that she was not able to continue living in her own home and, in May 1993, she moved to Laurel Bank and became a patient of Shipman.
According to an entry made by Shipman in the handwritten general practitioner records for 2nd
October 1993, Miss Wass had an episode of supraventricular tachycardia with dyspnoea. Shipman found no abnormalities on examination and noted that her heart rate had reverted to normal. He prescribed verapamil to prevent recurrence.
In January 1994, Miss Wass had a chest infection which left her short of breath. Dr M A Matin, consultant physician, saw her in the home but found no obvious cause for her breathlessness, which he thought was probably associated with her mental state. He noted that her electrocardiogram (ECG) showed signs of a past heart attack. No treatment was arranged.
The Healthcall records suggest the duty doctor was twice called out in May 1995, when Miss Wass had severe respiratory problems. After that, she appears to have remained in reasonable health and the only entries in the medical records relate to routine visits.
The Days Leading up to Death
Mrs Sleigh recalls that she last saw her sister about a week before her death. At that time, she appeared to be in her usual health. It would appear that Miss Wass' health must have deteriorated during the next few days as, when Mr Kirby saw his aunt about two or three days before she died, she was asleep in bed and Mr Kirby left without disturbing her.
The Laurel Bank diary records that Miss Wass became unwell on 28th
October. Her chest was wheezy and she had a pale grey pallor. The note suggests that staff at the home contacted the surgery and were told that a prescription would be prepared that morning. Miss Wass' name appears in the acute prescriptions book for that day along with a request for antibiotics
'in liquid form'
. There is a second note, made later that day, recording that Miss Wass was to commence amoxycillin suspension three times a day that evening. Thus, it would appear that Shipman wrote a prescription for an antibiotic for Miss Wass without seeing her. Dr Grenville says that this was poor practice.
The Laurel Bank diary for 29th
October records that Miss Wass woke in the early hours of that morning. She took very little fluid and no food that day.
On 30th
October, Shipman was asked to visit. The visits book contains the following entry:
'Kathleen Wass - Laurel Bank - had A/B - chest infection
no better, quite poorly'
.
Shipman called later that day and the note in the Laurel Bank diary reads:
'Dr Shipman called, said there was no
concern Re: colour of skin. Still says she
has chest infection, & will call back
wednesday to see her, & get her up
tomorrow lunchtime, no further treatment'
.
This visit was not recorded by Shipman in either the handwritten or the computerised records.
It appears that Miss Wass did get up, at least on Wednesday, 1st
November. At lunchtime, she fell from a dining room chair but suffered no obvious injury. Shipman saw her later that day and seemed happy with her condition. He said that the staff should 'just carry on as normal'. The computerised records show that Shipman diagnosed chronic obstructive airways disease, although he thought that Miss Wass' chest was better. There is no suggestion that he gave an injection.
The Day of the Death
The Laurel Bank diary for 2nd
November records as follows:
'9.00am. CA
(
care assistant
)
had found Kay had Passed away
DR Shipman informed. Sisster
(
sic
)
informed
and will Ring later. I Rang her because
She was on her way down to see her
DR Shipman Rang and will call at about 1130'
.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD and recorded that he had last seen Miss Wass alive on 1st
November 1995, the day before her death. He certified that the cause of death was old age.
Miss Wass was buried.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Baker observed that the cause of death was not properly established and he regarded the diagnosis of 'old age' as 'superficial'.
Dr Grenville says that Miss Wass was an elderly woman suffering from dementia and chronic obstructive airways disease, who developed a chest infection shortly before she died. In Dr Grenville's opinion, it is possible that her chest infection had not responded adequately to the antibiotics that she had been prescribed and that this caused her death. Dr Grenville feels that it is also possible that the chest infection put a strain on Miss Wass' heart and caused a heart attack during the night of 1st
/2nd
November. Dr Grenville says that it was not appropriate for Shipman to attribute Miss Wass' death to old age. He thinks Shipman could properly have certified that the death was due to a chest infection.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Miss Wass died of natural causes, probably as the result of a chest infection or a heart attack. It appears from the Laurel Bank diary that she was unwell for a few days before her death and that her death, although quite sudden, was not inexplicable.
The Laurel Bank diary gives every appearance of being a genuinely contemporaneous record of events. It suggests that Shipman was not involved in Miss Wass' death. Shipman visited on 1st
November and gave no treatment. I am confident that, if he had given an injection, a record would have been made in the diary. No change in Miss Wass' condition is noted after his departure on that day. There is no evidence that he came to the home again until after her death.
I agree with Dr Grenville and Professor Baker that the certified cause of death was not appropriate. However, it does not seem to me that this factor gives rise to any suspicion that Shipman caused Miss Wass' death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001