The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ellen Frances Wharam
Introduction
Mrs Ellen Frances Wharam died at Bowlacre, a residential home for the elderly, Stockport Road, Hyde on Sunday, 5th
July 1981 at the age of 91. She had probably been a patient of Shipman for about 12 months. He certified that the cause of her death was carcinoma of the ovary.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Sandra Holdsworth, the former manager at Bowlacre. This statement deals only with the arrangements at Bowlacre and not with the circumstances of Mrs Wharam's death. Mrs Holdsworth did not begin work at Bowlacre until some time after Mrs Wharam's death. Mrs Christine Jean Richardson (Mrs Wharam's granddaughter) was the informant named on the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'). She has declined to provide a statement to the Inquiry. Accordingly, very little is known about the circumstances surrounding Mrs Wharam's death. The Inquiry has had access to the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), the cremation forms, the death certificate and Shipman's visits book for 1981. Mrs Wharam's medical records have not survived.
The Evidence
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. Shipman stated that he had last seen Mrs Wharam alive on 24th
June 1981, just less than two weeks before she died. Mrs Wharam's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book either on the day of her death or on 24th
June 1981. Her name last appears in the visits book on 15th
June 1981. There is no record in the visits book to suggest that Shipman visited Bowlacre at all between 15th
June and 5th
July 1981. The counterfoil is dated 6th
July 1981, the day after the death. Shipman said that another medical practitioner had seen the body after death. There would not be a post-mortem examination.
Mrs Wharam was cremated and Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He recorded that Mrs Wharam died at 10.45am on 5th
July 1981. He said that he had attended her during her last illness for four months and that he had last seen her alive on 24th
June 1981. He claimed to have seen the body 48 hours after death and to have carried out a complete external examination. The mode of death was said to be a coma lasting 48 hours. He said that his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on statements made by the staff at Bowlacre. He recorded that no one had been present at the moment of death and that Mrs Wharam had been found dead
'mid morning'
.
On cremation Form A, which was signed by Mrs Richardson, it is said that the death occurred at 10.45am.
Conclusion
So little is known about the circumstances of this death that I do not feel able to reach any positive conclusion. The facts that Mrs Wharam was 91 years of age and lived in a nursing home, considered in conjunction with the absence on any evidence that Shipman visited her shortly before her death, would suggest that she probably died a natural death. However, there are some causes for concern. If, as Shipman certified, Mrs Wharam was suffering from carcinoma of the ovary, it would seem likely that she would have needed regular, if not frequent, medical attention. I would have expected to see regular visits recorded in the visits book. It is possible that Mrs Wharam's care had been assigned to the district nurses, but no information is available about that. Shipman frequently lied when completing MCCDs and Forms B. When not lying, Shipman was often careless in completing these forms. I have no confidence in what he wrote there.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001