The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Maud Wilkinson
Introduction
Miss Maud Wilkinson died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Wednesday, 3rd
May 1995 at the age of 82. She was registered with Dr Stephen Proctor at the Clarendon House practice in Hyde, and had not been a patient of Shipman. At this time, Shipman was a sole practitioner at the Market Street Surgery.
In August 1998, following the early publicity surrounding police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mr John Shaw, who operated a taxi service in Hyde, contacted the police. He expressed concern about the deaths of 21 of Shipman's patients, including that of Miss Wilkinson. The police ascertained that Miss Wilkinson was registered as a patient with Dr Proctor. The police also noted that the Market Street Surgery computer had no record of Miss Wilkinson as a patient of Shipman. The police did not carry out any further investigation.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Shaw and Mrs Beryl Dickinson, a former neighbour of Miss Wilkinson. The Inquiry has not had access to Miss Wilkinson's general practitioner notes but has examined the nursing notes from Charnley House.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Mr Shaw's Expression of Concern
In his statement to the Inquiry, Mr Shaw said that he had known Miss Wilkinson since 1987 and that she was a regular customer as well as a neighbour. Every Saturday, he would drive Miss Wilkinson to her friend's house on Mona Street in Hyde. Mr Shaw recalls seeing Miss Wilkinson the week before she died and she did not mention to him any health problems. At paragraph 27 of his statement, Mr Shaw stated his belief that Mrs Dickinson had found Miss Wilkinson dead, and that she had told him this. However, he added that he had recently spoken to Mrs Dickinson, who had told him that Miss Wilkinson was not one of Shipman's patients. I understand that Mr Shaw was recognising that he had made a mistake in expressing concern about Miss Wilkinson's death.
Mrs Dickinson's Evidence
Mrs Dickinson lived in the flat next to Miss Wilkinson and would see her every day, until Miss Wilkinson moved into a care home, a few weeks before her death. She does not know to which home Miss Wilkinson was taken. The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') shows that she died at Charnley House.
Mrs Dickinson knows nothing more of the circumstances of Miss Wilkinson's death. She certainly did not find Miss Wilkinson's body. She did, however, find Mrs Irene Brooder's body. Mrs Brooder was a patient of Shipman and her death was also investigated by the Inquiry.
The Circumstances of the Death
The nursing notes from Charnley House show that, during Miss Wilkinson's stay there, her family and friends visited her very frequently. In the few days before her death, Miss Wilkinson's health declined. Dr Proctor visited her. On the day before her death, she was suffering from an infected leg and a chest infection. Dr Proctor prescribed two antibiotics. It was noted that she was not passing urine and the nurses were instructed to monitor her fluid intake and output. Dr Proctor felt that Miss Wilkinson was too ill to be moved to hospital. The following morning, she was said to be very poorly. She took no fluids and passed no urine. Dr Proctor was asked to visit but Miss Wilkinson died at 11.20am, before he arrived. He confirmed her death at 12.30pm and certified that it was due to congestive heart failure. Carcinoma of the uterus was said to have contributed to the death.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Miss Wilkinson died a natural death and that she was not seen by Shipman at or about the time of her death.
Mr Shaw's concern seems to have arisen because he confused Miss Wilkinson with Mrs Irene Brooder. I hope that this confusion has not caused distress to Miss Wilkinson's family and that any anxiety which they felt has now been quite allayed.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001