The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Sydney Walton
Introduction
Mr Sydney Walton died at his home, 15 Rutland Street, Hyde on Wednesday, 2nd
May 1979 at the age of 57. He lived there with his wife, a daughter and a grandchild. His wife, Mrs Bertha Walton (who was later to remarry and become Mrs Bertha Moss), was killed by Shipman in his surgery on 13th
June 1995. Mr and Mrs Walton were patients of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Walton's death was bronchopneumonia due to chronic bronchitis.
In September 2001, the Inquiry published a list of deaths in relation to which Shipman had certified the cause but where only limited information was available. Mr Walton's name was on that list. His family then made contact with the Inquiry and statements were taken from his three daughters, Mrs Helen Blackwell, Mrs Brenda Hurst and Mrs Betty Clayton, as well as from Mrs Clayton's daughter, Mrs Pamela Jane O'Gorman.
On Monday, 10th
December 2001, Mrs Blackwell, Mrs Hurst and Mrs O'Gorman gave oral evidence at a hearing but Mrs Clayton did not attend. On the Friday before the hearing, the Inquiry was told that she was reluctant to attend. On the day of the hearing, she sent a message from her general practitioner which said that she felt upset about the investigation into her father's death and did not feel able to attend the Inquiry in person. The doctor said that he fully supported her decision on medical grounds. Those grounds were wholly unspecified. Taking into account all the circumstances, I decided not to postpone the hearing so as to secure her attendance. The result is that I am unable to attach much weight to her statement of evidence.
The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1979, as well as to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil. No other documentation is available.
Personal Background
Mr Walton did not enjoy the best of health. He suffered from angina, for which he took regular medication. Despite this medication, he suffered episodes of breathlessness and chest pain. His wife used to call out the doctor when he was suffering a particularly severe attack. As well as angina, he also suffered with respiratory problems. He was a heavy smoker and he had worked with chemicals. He had an oxygen cylinder at home to help with his breathing and he would use this when breathless. He also took diuretic medication, which suggests that he may well have had a degree of congestive heart failure.
These illnesses curtailed Mr Walton's activities. Although he was able to care for himself, he could not walk great distances and although he was able to walk to the public house for a drink most evenings, it is said that he would have to stop for a rest even when walking short distances. His bed was downstairs in the house and his normal routine was to get up in the morning, to spend the day in his chair or in bed watching television, and then often to go out for a drink in the evening.
Shipman's visits book does not record any visit to Mr Walton in 1979 before 30th
April. The family does not recollect any deterioration in Mr Walton's condition in the weeks or days leading up to his death and none of his daughters was expecting him to die when he did. However, the visits book suggests that Shipman visited Mr Walton on 30th
April, 1st
May and 2nd
May. This suggests that he was in need of medical attention on those days and implies that he was suffering from some acute symptoms on top of his chronic conditions. None of the family recalls that Shipman visited on the day before Mr Walton's death.
The Day of the Death
The evidence from the witnesses as to what happened that day is conflicting.
Mrs Clayton lived in the same street as her parents and saw them every day. According to her witness statement, on 2nd
May, she went to their house at about 10am to 10.30am. Mr Walton seemed in good spirits and was asking for a drink of Oxo. He then said that he wanted to sleep, and went to lie down on his bed. He slept for about one hour. When he awoke, which would have been at about midday, he was feeling breathless and asked for his oxygen. It seemed to Mrs Clayton that he was having 'one of his usual panic attacks' and neither she nor her mother was particularly concerned. Unusually, however, even with his oxygen mask, Mr Walton continued to struggle for breath. They became concerned about him and asked for the doctor to attend.
Shipman was called and he arrived 'after lunch' when Mr Walton was still very breathless. Mrs Clayton remembers Shipman sitting on the bed talking to her father and telling Mr Walton that he would give him something to ease his pain. He did not mention an injection specifically. Mrs Clayton cannot remember what, if anything, Shipman gave to her father because she did not stay in the room all of the time Shipman was there.
Mrs Clayton says that her father did then seem to calm down and went back to sleep. She says that shortly after her father had calmed down, his eyes began to flicker as if he was not in a proper sleep. Shipman then informed those present that Mr Walton had died. Mrs Clayton says that she does not remember Shipman saying anything about the cause of her father's death but his manner seemed very matter of fact. Only a short time passed between Shipman's arrival and her father's death. Mrs Clayton remembers that two ambulance men arrived, although she does not remember who called for them or in what circumstances. Mrs Hurst then arrived and, when she was told that her father had died, she became extremely distressed.
Mrs O'Gorman, who was only 12 years old at the time, remembers that she accompanied her mother to her grandparents' house. She recalls that her grandfather was in bed when they arrived, whereas her mother's evidence suggests that Mr Walton was out of bed. She remembers that Mr Walton was no worse than usual and was not having an attack of breathlessness. He asked for a cup of Oxo and she was sent home to fetch some. When she left, Shipman was not there. When she returned, only ten minutes later, he was there. She says that it may be that the true reason why she was sent out was because her mother and grandmother did not want her to see how ill her grandfather was. Within that ten minute period, it would appear that her grandfather's condition deteriorated quite dramatically. Her mother would not allow her into the room where Mr Walton lay. She remembers that Shipman was there and was giving some tablets to her aunt, Mrs Hurst, to calm her down. She does not know whether her grandfather was dead at the time of her return or whether he was just extremely unwell. She did not see him alive again, however. I think that Mrs O'Gorman's recollection must be at fault as I do not think it possible that so much could have happened within the short period of her absence while fetching the Oxo. It is not at all surprising that her memory is not accurate. She was only 12 at the time and is trying to remember events that occurred over 20 years ago. I am sure, however, that she was doing her best to remember and to tell the truth.
Mrs Hurst was living with her parents at the time of her father's death. She remembers that she went out of the house at about 9.30am to 10am, and that by that time her father had got up and dressed himself and was seated in his normal chair. He seemed no more or less ill than usual. She would not have gone out if he had been seriously ill. She remembers arriving back home either late that morning or at lunchtime. Mrs Clayton came running out of the house and told her that their father had died. Mrs Hurst was very distressed and she remembers that when she went into the kitchen at the rear of the house, Shipman gave her a tablet to calm her down. She did not see her father's body again as she remained in the kitchen.
In oral evidence she said that afterwards she talked to her mother about the death but did not discuss what had happened in any detail. Her mother said that her father had asked for a cup of strong Oxo. Her mother did not say that Mr Walton had been in pain or that Shipman had given him any treatment or injection. She did not think her mother had ever said that Shipman was present at the moment of death. She thinks that it was her sister, Mrs Clayton, who told her that Shipman was present when her father died. However, she had only learned this after the Inquiry had advertised for information about a number of deaths and her father's name had appeared in the list. She said that she thought that Mrs Clayton had not known until about September 2001 that Shipman was her father's doctor.
Mrs Blackwell used to see her parents about two or three times a week. She worked part time and had arrived at work on the day of the death at 10.30am as usual. If her father had been seriously ill by the time of her departure, she would have been told of his illness and would not have gone. She did not in fact learn of the death until after she arrived home at about 2.45pm. It seems most likely that her father must have died shortly before or some time after 2pm, as Mrs Blackwell had not been telephoned with the news when she was still at work. She does not remember seeing a doctor or paramedics at the house but she was there when the undertakers took the body away. All the information she has about the death came from her sisters. She recalls that at the time she was told that her father had had a bad attack of breathlessness. He had been given oxygen and the doctor had been called but he had died. She did not remember whether she had been told that Shipman was present at the death.
Mrs Blackwell said that, recently, Mrs Clayton had told her that her father had a sleep at about lunchtime. He awoke having a panic attack. Shipman was called out, and arrived in the mid-afternoon. Mrs Clayton told her that Shipman had sat on the edge of her father's bed and said that he would give him something to ease his pain, although she did not know whether Shipman gave an injection or tablets or, presumably, anything at all. So far as she understood it from her sister, Shipman had then left. Then, after Shipman had left, Mr Walton's condition began to deteriorate and his eyes began flickering and his breathing became laboured. It was in response to this deterioration, according to Mrs Blackwell's understanding, that her mother called for an ambulance but her father died before the ambulance arrived. Shipman then came back to the house and arrived after the ambulance.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate has not survived, its counterfoil has been recovered. On it Shipman stated that he had last seen Mr Walton alive on 1st May, the day before the death. He said he had seen the body after death and that there would be no post-mortem examination. He gave the cause of death as bronchopneumonia, which was due to chronic bronchitis. He said that myocardial ischaemia had contributed to the death but was not related to the bronchopneumonia.
On the death certificate, it is recorded that Mrs Walton, the widow, was present at the death.
The Aftermath
In August 1998, during the initial publicity surrounding the police investigation into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy but before Shipman was arrested, Mrs Blackwell contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances of the death of her mother. The police investigated that death and took statements from five of Mrs Moss' six daughters, including Mrs Clayton and Mrs Hurst. It is clear from these statements that Mrs Moss' family was gravely concerned about her death and with good cause. There is no doubt that Shipman killed her. However, no concerns were ever expressed about Mr Walton's death, despite the fact that Shipman was his doctor too. If Shipman had been present at his death, one might have expected the family, especially Mrs Clayton, to be concerned about him as well as about Mrs Moss. However, no concerns were raised until Mr Walton's name appeared in the Inquiry's advertisement in September 2001.
When Mr Walton's three daughters provided written statements for the Inquiry they did not deal in any detail with their state of knowledge about Shipman's possible involvement in their father's death. Mrs Blackwell said that she had never suspected that Shipman was involved in his death. Mrs Hurst said that she could not believe that she had not connected her father's death with Shipman until she read his name in the newspaper. Mrs Clayton said nothing at all on the subject.
At the hearing, Mrs Blackwell and Mrs Hurst were asked about their state of knowledge and belief as to Shipman's connection with their father and his death.
Mrs Hurst said that when the family had seen the advertisement three months earlier, her sister Mrs Clayton had told her that Shipman was present at the death. Until then, Mrs Hurst had not known that. She had known that Shipman was her father's doctor, as well as her mother's, and that he had been in the house just after the death. But it had not entered her mind that he might have been involved in her father's death, even after she had come to realise that Shipman had killed her mother.
Mrs Blackwell said that she did not even know until recently that Shipman had certified the cause of her father's death. She does not think she even knew that her father and mother were both patients of Shipman. She explained that she had only made the connection with Shipman recently and had then been given an account of Shipman's involvement in the death by her sister, Mrs Clayton.
Unfortunately, Mrs Clayton did not attend the Inquiry and has not given me her explanation for her failure to make the connection between Shipman and her father's death at the time when she came to realise that Shipman had killed her mother. Mrs Hurst sought to explain the position to me, although this was hearsay evidence. Mrs Hurst said that Mrs Clayton did not know, until September 2001, that Shipman had been her father's doctor and the doctor who was present at the death. She said that Mrs Clayton had lived in Australia, although she had returned three months before her father's death and was living in the same street as her parents at the time of the death and had continued to live there since. Even though Shipman had remained her mother's doctor until her death, I was told that Mrs Clayton had never realised that Shipman was the doctor who had been present on the day of Mr Walton's death.
Conclusion
I have found this case difficult to decide. My task has been made particularly difficult by the passage of time and the absence of any medical records from which I could make a reliable assessment of Mr Walton's state of health in the weeks and days before his death.
I think it likely that all members of the family have forgotten the detail though not the essence of their father's illness. That is not surprising after the passage of more than 20 years. From the fact that he used an oxygen cylinder, I think I must assume that he was quite seriously ill with chronic bronchitis and probably emphysema. I think it likely that Shipman did visit Mr Walton on 30th April and 1st May. This evidence comes from his visits book. Although it is quite possible that Shipman had fabricated entries in his visits book, I have not found evidence that he did so, in the way that I have found evidence of the fabrication of medical records. I have the impression that the visits book was no more than an aide-memoire for Shipman. If, as I think likely, Shipman did visit on the two days preceding the death, this would indicate that Mr Walton was more seriously ill than usual. I think the family may have forgotten that. However, I accept that they did not think he was critically ill and did not expect him to die. Mrs Hurst would not have gone shopping in Hyde and Mrs Blackwell would not have gone to work, had that been the case.
I cannot say whether Mr Walton might have been suffering from bronchopneumonia. Certainly an illness lasting three days before death is consistent with the development of bronchopneumonia. However, if this was bronchopneumonia, the family would have been very worried about his condition and I do not think they were. Accordingly, I have some suspicions about the cause of death which Shipman gave.
My principal difficulty arises from the evidence of Mrs Clayton, who is the only witness who says that Shipman was present at the death or raises any suggestion that he might have given an injection of opiate. I have not had the advantage of hearing Mrs Clayton in person. I confess that I am puzzled by her claim that she never made the connection between her father's death and Shipman. I find it hard to believe that, if her present recollection of the day's events is accurate and true, she could have failed to make the connection in the three years which had elapsed between Shipman's arrest and the publication of the advertisement. Mrs Clayton claims to have known that a doctor was present at her father's death. She claims to have seen him sitting on her father's bedside, offering to give him something for his pain. She says that he died within quite a short time after that. She claims to recall that the doctor was very matter of fact in his manner. She says that her father's death was a great shock to her. I infer that she felt it was sudden and unexpected. In my view, anyone who had so clear a recollection of her father's death and who knew that Shipman was her mother's doctor, could hardly have failed to realise, when she heard accounts of Shipman's activities in the media, that Shipman might also have been her father's doctor.
I accept, however, that Mrs Clayton did not make the connection. If she had, she would have volunteered her information as soon as she could. She and her sisters are represented by experienced solicitors in connection with Mrs Moss' death. In the absence of the opportunity to hear her own account, I can only say that I cannot have confidence in Mrs Clayton's account of the circumstances of her father's death. If the doctor was not present at the death, had not offered to give Mr Walton something for the pain, had not been matter of fact in his manner, I can well understand why the news of Shipman's practices did not ring any bells in her mind. I also note that there is an important difference between the account Mrs Clayton gave to the Inquiry and the account which Mrs Blackwell says she gave to her in September 2001. To the Inquiry she suggested that the death occurred while Shipman was there and within a short time after his arrival. To Mrs Blackwell she seems to have said that there was deterioration after Shipman had gone and Mrs Walton called the ambulance. Mrs Clayton is the only witness who claims to be able to give a full account of what had occurred. Neither Mrs Hurst nor Mrs Blackwell was present. Mrs O'Gorman was only 12 and her recollection is obviously flawed. As I am not confident of the accuracy and reliability of Mrs Clayton's account, I cannot reach any conclusion as to whether Shipman gave any injection at all.
I am not even sure that Shipman was present at the house before the death. Although he noted in his visits book an intention to visit Mr Walton on 2nd
May, he claimed on the MCCD that he did not see Mr Walton alive on that day. Although I recognise that very little credence can be given to Shipman's claims, it does seem possible that he did not arrive until after the death.
Shipman did not usually kill patients in the presence of members of the family although I think, on occasions, he probably hastened the deaths of patients who were close to death, even in the presence of relatives. The family says that Mr Walton was not close to death. To kill Mr Walton while his wife and one of his daughters were in the house would have been very risky. In 1979, Shipman was not the accomplished serial killer that he later became.
I am afraid that the uncertainties in the evidence relating to Mr Walton's death mean that I am unable to reach any decision at all as to whether or not Shipman was involved.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001