The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
George Winston
Introduction
Mr George Winston died at his home, 14 Woodfield Avenue, Hyde at the age of 80. His body was discovered on Wednesday, 13th
July 1983 and it seems likely that he died either on that day or on the previous day. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. After a post-mortem examination without inquest, the South Manchester Coroner certified that the cause of Mr Winston's death was carcinoma of the left lung.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr William Fletcher Winston (Mr Winston's grandson) and from Mrs Joan Rooney, Mr Kenneth Savill and Mr Alan Jones (all neighbours of Mr Winston). The Inquiry has had access to the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and Shipman's visits book for 1983. The Inquiry has also had access to the Medical History in the Case of Sudden Death, Report of Sudden Death and Report of Death to the Coroner, prepared by the Greater Manchester Police, and the Post-Mortem Examination Report prepared by Dr A S Day of Tameside General Hospital. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Professor Helen Whitwell. Mr Winston's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Winston was a widower and lived alone. He was quite independent and did most of his own cooking, shopping and cleaning. His daughter-in-law and grandson gave him some help. He was well liked by his neighbours.
Mr William Winston told the Inquiry that his grandfather had always suffered from a bad chest and attended hospital in connection with this complaint. He had been quite a heavy smoker until the 1970s. He also had very poor eyesight. In other respects he seemed well. He loved gardening and also used to walk to and from Hyde, a round journey of two miles, about twice a week. To his neighbours, he seemed younger than his years.
Mr William Winston last saw his grandfather on the Sunday before he died. Apart from his usual problems with his chest, he seemed well.
Mrs Rooney says that she saw Mr Winston at about 2pm on Tuesday, 12th
July 1983. He was standing on his front doorstep, with the door open behind him. It was a very hot day and Mr Winston joked about this and said, 'If it gets any hotter, Joan, I'll have to take my braces off'. Mr Winston was his usual self and seemed quite well. He said nothing about feeling unwell.
There is no evidence that Shipman attended Mr Winston on 12th
July and Mr Winston's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for that day or during the previous two weeks.
The Discovery of the Death
Both Mr Savill, who is a joiner by trade, and Mr Jones, recall seeing Mr Winston's daughter-in-law trying to gain access to Mr Winston's house on Wednesday, 13th
July 1983. She could not open the door with her key because Mr Winston had engaged the chain on the inside. Mr Savill used a screwdriver to remove the chain and then went inside with Mrs Winston. Mr Savill went upstairs and found Mr Winston collapsed on his bed. He was lying on his side with his head on a pillow. It appeared to Mr Savill that Mr Winston had been in the process of changing his trousers when he had 'keeled over' sideways.
Mr William Winston has no first-hand knowledge of the circumstances surrounding his grandfather's death. His recollection is that his mother (who has since died) told him that she had visited her father-in-law and found the front door open. She found Mr Winston sitting on his bed and it appeared that he flopped back on the bed and died. It is likely that this account of events is inaccurate because it is not consistent with the recollection of Mr Savill and Mr Jones, who have given direct evidence of an incident in which they took part.
There was no report that any neighbour had seen Shipman or his car at or near Mr Winston's house on 13th
July before the death was discovered. Mr Winston's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for that day.
The police were called to the house and Shipman also attended. It appears that he pronounced Mr Winston dead but said that he could not certify the cause of death. The death was accordingly referred to the coroner, with a view to post-mortem examination.
The Coroner's Documents
The police officer who attended, PC Heathcote, has no personal recollection of this death.
It appears from the Report of Sudden Death that Mr Winston was found dead at 8.50pm on 13th
July by his daughter-in-law, Mrs Margaret Winston. He had last been seen alive at 2.10pm the previous day. Shipman certified the fact of death at 9.30pm on 13th
July. Mr Winston had been found lying on his bed but nothing more was known of the circumstances of the death.
The post-mortem report shows that Dr Day discovered, on internal examination, that the larynx and trachea were congested and contained mucoid materials; both lungs were congested and oedematous; a greyish-white tumour about 3cm in diameter was found. There were moderate grades of atheroma in the coronary vessels and mild to moderate grades in the aorta. The liver, kidneys and spleen were slightly congested but there was no tumour. All other findings were normal. Dr Day expressed the opinion that death was due to carcinoma of the left lung. He said that ischaemic heart disease contributed to the death. The coroner accepted this opinion.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Whitwell has told the Inquiry that, whilst the cause of death given is acceptable, the carcinoma in the lung had not spread and had not caused pneumonia. In Professor Whitwell's opinion, there were no findings from which a positive diagnosis of the cause of death could be made, either as the result of the lung tumour or ischaemic heart disease. In the absence of any toxicological test, Professor Whitwell could not comment on whether any noxious substance had been administered.
Conclusion
Although a post-mortem examination was held, the findings were equivocal. A tumour was found in the left lung but there was no positive evidence that Mr Winston died of the tumour rather than with it. The findings certainly do not exclude the possibility that Mr Winston died as the result of a lethal injection of morphine administered by Shipman. However, all the other evidence tends to suggest that he did not.
First, the fact that Shipman referred the case to the coroner suggests that he had not caused the death. Usually (although not quite invariably), when he had killed a patient, he certified the cause of death himself and avoided a referral to the coroner.
Second, there is no evidence that Shipman saw Mr Winston shortly before his death. That is not conclusive.
Third, the circumstances of the death, as described by Mr Savill, would suggest that this was a natural death. It would appear that Mr Winston had locked the front door and had secured it with a chain at some time before his death. Usually, when Shipman had killed a patient, he would wait until the patient was dead before leaving. Thus it would be impossible for him to secure the door behind him with a chain.
Fourth, most of Shipman's victims were found sitting or lying peacefully. Mr Winston, on the other hand, seems to have 'keeled over' while trying to take his trousers off. He might have been getting ready for bed on the evening of 12th
July. He might have felt ill at some time during 13th
July and have gone upstairs to lie down. His position and appearance in death are more consistent with a sudden death from natural causes than with death following a lethal injection of opiate.
Although I cannot absolutely rule out the possibility that Shipman was involved, it seems to me highly likely that Mr Winston died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001