The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Edith Whittle
Introduction
Miss Edith Whittle died at Pole Bank Hall Residential Care Home, Stockport Road, Hyde on Friday, 12th
February 1993 at the age of 84. She had been a patient of Shipman since April 1988 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that he considered Miss Whittle's death moderately suspicious on the basis of the contents of her medical records. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Miss Whittle's nephew, Mr Jack Wilding. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Wilding, Mrs Melanie Jayne Oakes, the matron at Pole Bank Hall from 1991 until November 1995, and care assistants Mrs Gillian Potts and Mrs Patricia Cassin. The Inquiry has also had access to Miss Whittle's general practitioner records and to the surgery appointments sheets, visits book and night visits book for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also had access to the Pole Bank Hall register of admissions, the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Whittle never married. She moved to Pole Bank Hall in April 1988. She suffered from angina, osteoarthritis and diverticular disease of the colon. In December 1988, she suffered a right-sided cerebrovascular accident.
In April 1989, she was found collapsed at Pole Bank Hall and was taken to Tameside General Hospital, where a diagnosis was made of epilepsy due to arteriosclerosis. Miss Whittle lost the power of speech, although she was able to understand what was going on around her. Towards the end of her life, she was quite frail and was unable to move without assistance. She remained cheerful and was visited regularly by her sisters.
Mrs Oakes recalls that she was on duty until 11pm on the day before Miss Whittle's death. There was no significant change in her condition. Shipman did not visit. Mrs Potts came on duty at 11pm. She does not remember checking on Miss Whittle during the night but thinks it likely that she did so at least once. Shipman did not visit during the night shift.
The Death
Mrs Potts says that the normal night shift procedure was to check all residents at about 6am. After that, the care assistants would start to wake the residents for breakfast. Mrs Potts says that, as soon as she went into Miss Whittle's room at 6am on Friday, 12th
February 1993, she realised that Miss Whittle had died. This did not come as a surprise. She fetched the matron. She says that Shipman had not visited the home by the time her shift ended at 8am.
Mrs Oakes' recollection of the circumstances surrounding Miss Whittle's death is different from that of Mrs Potts. She recalls that she was woken in the early hours of the morning by two of the night staff, one of whom was Mrs Potts, and was told that Miss Whittle was very restless and appeared to be in pain. She then went and sat with Miss Whittle and gave her a drink. She initially thought that there was no need to contact a doctor but, as she was leaving Miss Whittle's room, she was called back in by one of the night staff. She noticed Miss Whittle was getting worse and decided she would telephone for an emergency doctor. She does not say whether in fact she did so but she implies that Miss Whittle died very soon afterwards and before a doctor had arrived. Mrs Oakes says that she clearly recalls that she was in the room when Miss Whittle took her last breath. She herself was surprised by the suddenness of Miss Whittle's death and makes the point that Mr Wilding had not been warned that his aunt was close to death.
Mr Wilding was contacted by one of the staff at the home by telephone and was told that his aunt had died during the night.
The following entry appears in the visits book for 12th
February:
'Edith Whittle - Robinson & Hyde cremation'
.
The only entry relating to the death in Miss Whittle's medical records says:
'12
/2/93
old age
cerebro arteriosclerosis'
.
These documents taken together tend to confirm the witness evidence that Shipman did not go to the home or see Miss Whittle alive that night. It would seem that he was probably asked to visit the undertakers to examine the body and certify the cause of death.
However, Miss Whittle's name appears in the surgery night visits book for 12th
February 1993. This book was used to record visits made either by Shipman or by the deputising service between the hours of 10pm and 7am for which a special payment was recoverable. There is nothing in the book to indicate whether an out of hours visit did or did not take place. Taking all the evidence together, I think it is highly likely that, shortly before or shortly after Miss Whittle's death, the home telephoned the surgery number and was put through to Healthcall, the deputising service used by Shipman. It seems likely that a deputising doctor would have gone to the home and would have certified the fact of death. Once Shipman had indicated that he would be able to certify the cause of death, it would have been possible to move the body to a chapel of rest, where Shipman would have seen it later in the day.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. The certificate itself has not survived but its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that Miss Whittle died of old age at Pole Bank Hall on 12th
February 1993. He stated that he had last seen her alive on 5th
February. He said that he had seen her body after death and that there would be no post-mortem examination. The counterfoil is dated 12th
February 1993.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate, where he recorded that Miss Whittle died at 6.30am on 12th
February 1993. He stated that he had attended her during her last illness for a period of seven days and had last seen her alive seven days before her death. He said that he had made a complete external examination of the body about two hours after death. In response to the question asking what was the mode of death, Shipman crossed out the word 'syncope' and wrote:
'Found dead in bed
Alive at 10.00 at night dead at 6.00
morning'
.
Shipman stated that his answers as to mode and cause of death were based on statements made to him by staff at the home and that no one was present at the moment of death.
It is very doubtful that Shipman last saw Miss Whittle alive on 5th
February. Her name does not appear in the visits book for 5th
February 1993. The last recorded consultation in the medical records is dated 14th
January 1993. Miss Whittle's name appears in Shipman's visits book for that day, suggesting that he did visit her on that occasion.
The Expert Evidence
After considering the medical records, Professor Baker assessed the level of suspicion in this case to be moderate. However, on looking at the cremation documentation he considered the death to be not suspicious.
Conclusion
Although Mrs Oakes says that she was surprised at Miss Whittle's death, it does appear that she had been frail for some time and I do not think it could be said that her death was wholly unexpected.
The evidence of the circumstances of the death is not wholly clear. Mrs Oakes' evidence is not entirely consistent with that of Mrs Potts. However, the essence of their evidence is that Shipman did not visit Miss Whittle either on the day before her death or during the night when she died. Shipman himself nowhere suggested that he had seen Miss Whittle shortly before she died.
The only cause for concern arises because some of Shipman's entries on Form B and the MCCD counterfoil are probably not accurate and may well be untrue. I think it unlikely that Shipman saw Miss Whittle on 5th
February. I think it more likely that he had not seen her for about a month before her death. I have come across many occasions when Shipman has filled in MCCDs and Forms B inaccurately when there is no reason to suppose that he has been involved in the death. I think he paid scant regard to his duties in connection with certification procedures.
There appears to me to be no real reason to suspect that Shipman was involved in this death. I am satisfied that Miss Whittle died of natural causes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001