The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Emily Williams
Introduction
Mrs Emily Williams died at 5 Hilda Road, Hyde, the home of her daughter, Mrs Dorothy Anne McKey, on Monday, 25th
September 1978 at the age of 75. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the colon.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed an advertisement in a number of newspapers, publishing a list of cases in which the Inquiry had only limited information as to the circumstances of the death and in which no relatives had been traced. In response, the Inquiry was contacted by Mr Derek Williams, Mrs Williams' son, who provided a statement. Mrs McKey has suffered a stroke and has been unable to assist the Inquiry.
Mrs Williams' medical records have not survived and the practice documents available from Shipman's time at the Donneybrook Surgery do not date back as far as 1978.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Williams had been a heavy smoker and, about 12 months before she died, she was diagnosed as suffering from throat cancer. Her life expectancy was said by the specialist treating her to be a matter of months. At some later stage, Mrs Williams experienced severe stomach pains and was admitted to Tameside General Hospital. She spent three weeks in hospital, during which time she was diagnosed as suffering from secondary bowel cancer. Following her discharge, her condition was such that she was unable to look after herself and she stayed at her daughter's house on Hilda Road. Shipman visited her there two or three times a week.
In the days leading up to her death, Mrs Williams' condition deteriorated. She lost weight and was in a great deal of pain. Her son realised that she was dying.
The Death
Mrs McKey told Mr Williams that on the day before Mrs Williams died, Shipman visited her and told Mrs McKey that her mother was dying. Shipman said that he would give Mrs Williams an injection to ease her pain and that she would probably die overnight. Shipman gave an injection and left.
When Mr Williams returned home from work at about lunchtime the following day, his sister telephoned and told him that Mrs Williams had died. She later said to Mr Williams that Shipman had arrived at the house that morning and was surprised that Mrs Williams was still alive. He then gave her another injection and Mrs Williams died 'within a short period of time'. Mr Williams cannot remember whether his sister said that Shipman was still present when their mother died.
Mr Williams has said that neither he nor any members of his family had any suspicions about the way in which Shipman had treated his mother. She was very ill and had been suffering greatly and they felt that he had treated her compassionately.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not been recovered, but the counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman recorded that he last saw Mrs Williams alive on 22nd
September, although that is written over another date which is illegible. He said that there would not be a post-mortem examination and that he had seen the body after death. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 25th
September 1978.
Conclusion
There is no doubt that Mrs Williams was in the terminal stage of cancer and did not have long to live. She was in great pain. I think it is likely that Mr Williams' account of the events leading to the death is accurate. I accept that Shipman visited on the day before the death and on the morning of the day of the death. It also seems highly likely that he would have given Mrs Williams a pain-relieving injection on both occasions. Those injections were probably of a strong opiate, probably diamorphine. Provided that a genuine attempt was made to estimate a suitable dose, Shipman's actions would not be unlawful. Dr John Grenville has explained that it can be very difficult for a general practitioner to estimate the appropriate dose in these circumstances. If he errs on the low side, the patient's pain is not relieved. If he errs on the high side, he might hasten the patient's death.
In this case, Mr Williams' sister told him that their mother died within a short period of time after Shipman had given an injection. We do not know what is meant by 'a short period of time'. If Mrs Williams died within a few minutes of the injection, I would have little hesitation in concluding that Shipman had probably given a lethal dose of opiates intravenously. It would be something of a coincidence if she were to die naturally within minutes. However, I cannot assume that that is what happened. Indeed, the expression 'within a short period of time' implies a period rather longer than a few minutes.
If Mrs Williams died within about an hour of the injection, a suspicion arises that the injection was of a lethal dose and was given intramuscularly. That would be the usual method of giving a pain-relieving injection which was intended to have effect over a period of several hours. If the dose were lethal, death would be expected to follow within about an hour. I think it is quite likely that Shipman gave a lethal injection, knowing and intending that it would bring Mrs Williams' life and her suffering to an end within an hour. However, as Mrs Williams was very ill indeed, it is quite possible that she died naturally within an hour. She might also have lived rather longer than an hour, in which case the injection will not have directly precipitated her death.
Thus, there is a suspicion that Shipman gave an excessive dose of opiate which brought Mrs Williams' life to an end a short time before she would have died naturally. My suspicion that this occurred is heightened by Shipman's entry on the MCCD counterfoil. On 25th
September, the very day of the death, Shipman claimed that he had last seen Mrs Williams alive three days earlier. Events were so recent that he could hardly have made a mistake about the day when he had last seen her. He must have known that he saw her that morning. That he should pretend that he had not seen her for three days raises my level of suspicion. It is, of course, possible that Mr Williams is mistaken about the course of events and that Shipman did not see Mrs Williams for three days before her death.
My suspicion is such that I cannot say that I think it is likely that Mrs Williams' death was natural. Nor is it high enough for me to say that I think it likely that Shipman killed her. I cannot say. However, I recognise that if Shipman did deliberately hasten Mrs Williams' death, he did so by only a short time and he also relieved her suffering. Her family felt that he acted with compassion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001