The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Fanny Wood
Introduction
Mrs Fanny Wood died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Friday, 14th
March 1980 at the age of 89. It appears likely that she became a patient of Shipman at the time of her admission to Charnley House in January 1980. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
There has been no inquest into Mrs Wood's death but it has been investigated by the Inquiry. The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, the cremation forms, Shipman's visits book for 1980 and the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary. No medical records have been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Wood was admitted to Charnley House on 15th
January 1980. Although her medical condition was not described, it was noted in the daily diary that she walked with a frame and that her medication included Largactil for night sedation and Mogadon sleeping tablets.
It appears that there were many occasions when Mrs Wood passed a disturbed night. The diary entry for Friday, 25th
January 1980 shows that Shipman was to be asked to register Mrs Wood as his patient and to increase her night sedation, as she had been very disturbed during the previous night. It does not appear that Shipman visited that morning, although Dr G Bennett called, but not to see Mrs Wood. There is no subsequent entry confirming that Shipman accepted Mrs Wood as his patient. Mrs Stansfield, the former manager of Charnley House, who made that note, has confirmed in her generic evidence that Shipman was always very prepared to take on new patients who lived at the home and that it was always Shipman who was recommended by the Donneybrook Surgery staff. She also says that Shipman often used to come to the home unannounced.
In February 1980, Mrs Wood suffered from a troublesome eye condition and by the end of that month it was recorded that she was sleeping all the time, would not walk and seemed to have lost the will to live. It was said that she was constantly falling asleep during the day.
On the morning of Thursday, 6th
March 1980, Dr Roberts called to see Mrs Wood. The full note reads as follows:
'Dr Roberts called this AM Coronary Slight, light diet coronary this AM about 8AM please observe every
hr and through night. Haemorrhoids bleeding heavily throughout today, was still trying to pass motion, small amount came away but bleeding persisted into late morning, blood very clean and clear. Diet taken'
.
The entry for that day then continues in relation to the afternoon:
'No improvement, fingers still blue, breathing heavy, pulse weak. Still no diet after lunch. haemorrhoids still bleeding passed large motion please observe'
.
Although Mrs Wood seems to have improved later that afternoon, there was some concern over her condition and she was disturbed in the night. On the following day, Friday, 7th
March 1980, it is recorded that she had improved slightly. However, she remained agitated over the following days and was taking only a little food. Shipman's visits book records that he was to see Mrs Wood on Friday, 7th
March, but there are two lines through her name, which might suggest that the visit request was cancelled. There is no record in the daily diary to show that Shipman attended on that day.
Mrs Wood's name appears in Shipman's visits book for Saturday, 8th
March 1980, with no line through it. The Charnley House daily diary records that Shipman did not come, so it seems likely that a visit request was made but that, for some reason, Shipman did not attend.
On Monday, 10th
March 1980, Mrs Wood was seen by Shipman, although his visits book does not contain her name. It is noted in the diary that Mrs Wood's condition was unchanged, that she was given
'all care'
and that her personal hygiene was maintained. There is no note of any specific treatment given by Shipman.
On the morning of Thursday, 13th
March 1980, Mrs Wood was noted to be poorly. She was made comfortable but took no food. She was disturbed that night.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of 14th
March 1980, Mrs Wood's condition was said to be unchanged. The night report records that she died at 9pm. A doctor is said to have come at 10.45pm and her body was removed by Massey's undertakers at 11.15pm.
There is no record in the daily diary that Shipman visited either on that day or on any of the previous three days. Shipman's visits book reveals no visit on the day of the death.
Certification
Shipman certified that the cause of Mrs Wood's death was coronary thrombosis. On the MCCD counterfoil, he confirmed that the date of death was 14th
March 1980, although he incorrectly recorded that Mrs Wood was only 79 years of age. He stated that he had last seen her alive on 13th
March 1980, that he had seen the body after death and there was to be no post-mortem examination. He completed the MCCD counterfoil on 15th
March 1980.
As has already been noted, there is no suggestion, either in the visits book or in the daily diary, that Shipman visited on 13th
March. The last documented visit took place on Monday, 10th
March, as recorded in the Charnley House daily diary.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that Mrs Wood had died at
'20.30 hrs'
on 14th
March 1980 at Charnley House. He said that he had attended Mrs Wood during her last illness for eight days. He claimed that he had last seen her alive on 13th
March 1980, which is not substantiated by any of the documentation, although it is what he certified on the MCCD counterfoil. He said that he had seen the body more than 12 hours after death and, if this is accurate, he must have done so at the premises of the undertakers. He certified that the immediate cause of death was coronary thrombosis and that the mode of death was syncope lasting 20 to 30 minutes. He stated that his answers to the questions concerning cause and mode of death were based on statements made by Mrs Lanceley (the director of Charnley House) and the staff at Charnley House. He said that the staff at Charnley House had nursed Mrs Wood but that no one had been present at the moment of death.
Conclusion
It is clear that, from the time when she was first admitted to Charnley House, Mrs Wood was not in good health. Her condition seems to have taken a turn for the worse on the morning of Thursday, 6th
March 1980 when Dr Roberts diagnosed a slight heart attack. From that time onwards, her condition seems to have been poor and her death plainly did not come as a surprise to anyone who was involved in her care.
There is no record that Shipman visited Mrs Wood after Monday, 10th
March. Although Shipman was known to visit Charnley House unannounced and it is possible that some of his visits were not recorded, it does not seem likely that he visited Mrs Wood on the day of her death or in the few days preceding it.
Mrs Wood died at about 9pm on the evening of 14th
March. Although there might have been occasions when Shipman visited at that time of the evening, there is no evidence to suggest that he did so on this particular evening. It does not appear that Shipman was the doctor who came out to certify the fact of death, as he was to state on Form B that he saw the body more than 12 hours after death. He probably saw the body the following day at the undertakers.
In all the circumstances, I am quite satisfied that Mrs Wood died as the result of natural causes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001