The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Lavinia Wharmby
Introduction
Mrs Lavinia Wharmby died at her home, 20 Ward Street, Hyde on Wednesday, 18th
July 1979 at the age of 88. She was a patient of Shipman and thought highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the stomach.
The Inquiry has obtained statements from Mrs Carol Cowan and Mrs Michelle Harris (Mrs Wharmby's grandchildren). Their mother (Mrs Wharmby's daughter), Mrs Elsie Skillington, has since died. The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil and Shipman's visits book for 1979. Mrs Wharmby's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Wharmby was living with Mrs Skillington at the time of her death, although her granddaughters had both left home. In the spring of 1979, Mrs Wharmby and Mrs Skillington moved to Hyde. They had lived in Hyde in the past and had both been registered with Dr John Bennett. On her return, Mrs Wharmby registered with Shipman.
Mrs Harris says that, in the months before her death, her grandmother was quite frail. She had chronic chest problems. Following a fall in 1978, she fractured her hip and her mobility was significantly reduced. Her vision was very poor because of cataracts. She was effectively housebound.
Shortly after her return to Hyde, Mrs Wharmby was found to have stomach cancer. Her health then deteriorated rapidly. Mrs Cowan thinks that her grandmother was taking morphine to relieve her pain, although she is not sure of this. She recalls a brown medicine bottle with a pharmacist's label.
Mrs Harris, who was then 20 years old, last saw her grandmother during the weekend of 7th
July 1979. Mrs Wharmby had lost a lot of weight, was confined to bed and ate very little. Mrs Harris remembers that her grandmother used to groan in pain when she was moved, although Mrs Harris had the impression that the pain may have been due to arthritis rather than cancer.
Mrs Cowan, who was older than her sister, last saw her grandmother alive over the weekend of 14th
July 1979. She recalls that the district nurse visited to check that Mrs Wharmby had not developed bedsores. She had been confined to bed for some time. Her bed had been moved downstairs. On the Sunday, Mrs Wharmby was drifting in and out of sleep. Her face looked grey. Mrs Cowan had the impression that her grandmother was dying. Mrs Cowan does not think that Shipman visited Mrs Wharmby over that weekend. That is probably right, as her name does not appear in Shipman's visits book on either Saturday, 14th
July or Sunday, 15th
July.
Mrs Cowan remembers that Mrs Skillington told her to say her last goodbyes to her grandmother before she left. She said that Shipman had visited on Friday, 13th
July and had said that Mrs Wharmby was very unwell. He had told Mrs Skillington that he would give Mrs Wharmby 'an extra dose' the next time he saw her, which was going to be the following Wednesday. He had indicated that it would be Mrs Wharmby's 'final dose'. No mention had been made of an injection.
Mrs Wharmby's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book on Friday, 13th
July, but it does appear on Thursday, 12th
July and Tuesday, 17th
July, as well as on Wednesday, 18th
July, the day of the death. So, the next time Shipman was to see Mrs Wharmby was Tuesday and not Wednesday. It was on the Wednesday that she died.
The Day of the Death
Mr Paul Skillington, the brother of Mrs Harris and Mrs Cowan, cycled to Mrs Harris's home on Wednesday, 18th
July, to say that their grandmother was very unwell. Mrs Harris drove over to Hyde but, by the time she arrived, Mrs Wharmby had died and her body had been taken to the chapel of rest.
Mrs Cowan learned of the death by telephone at about 4pm to 4.30pm.
Mrs Cowan was told at some stage, although she cannot remember when or by whom, that Shipman had given her grandmother an injection and that Mrs Skillington was sitting with Mrs Wharmby as she died.
Mrs Skillington told Mrs Harris that Shipman had visited to give Mrs Wharmby some painkillers and that he had stayed with Mrs Skillington until Mrs Wharmby died. She did not specifically mention that Shipman had given an injection.
Certification
The MCCD has not been recovered, but its counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman said that he had last seen Mrs Wharmby alive on the day of her death, that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that he had seen the body after death. Shipman said that chronic bronchitis had contributed to the death but not to the carcinomatosis which was the immediate cause of death.
Mrs Skillington was the informant in relation to her mother's death and, according to the death certificate, she was present at the death.
Conclusion
It appears that Mrs Wharmby was suffering from terminal cancer. She was in pain and probably in need of pain-relieving drugs. If her pain could not be controlled by oral medication, it would have been appropriate for her to receive injections of morphine or diamorphine. If injections were given, they would probably have been given once to twice daily, by the intramuscular route, in order to spread their effect over a prolonged period. Mrs Wharmby's death was probably imminent and, since she was being visited by Shipman quite frequently, it would not be surprising if she died shortly after one of his visits.
The death is suspicious, however, because during the week before Mrs Wharmby died, Shipman apparently said that he would call on the day when Mrs Wharmby did in fact die, and that he would give her 'an extra dose' of the painkiller, which would be her 'final dose'. If this evidence is right, it suggests that Shipman might have had it in mind to give Mrs Wharmby a dose of opiates that was greater than was required to control her pain and was likely to end her life. However, it is possible that this remark was not made exactly as it is now recalled. It is quite possible that Shipman had said that he would have to increase Mrs Wharmby's dose of painkiller the following week. This is often necessary, as the pain worsens and the patient becomes habituated to the drug. It is quite possible that Shipman explained that, when he increased the dose to satisfy Mrs Wharmby's need for pain relief, the effect might be to make it her final dose. It is also quite possible that Shipman had warned that Mrs Wharmby could not be expected to live much longer and that Mrs Cowan was told to say goodbye. I find it strange that the suggestion was that Shipman would visit on a specific day the following week. If Mrs Wharmby were in such pain as required relief in the form of injections, I would have expected Shipman to visit every day. I note that Mrs Wharmby's name does not appear in the visits book every day. This raises the possibility that Mrs Wharmby's pain was being adequately controlled by oral medication and that she was not receiving regular injections. The position is far from clear. Some doubt is thrown on the accuracy of Mrs Cowan's recollection, as it would be strange if Shipman had expressed an intention to give the 'final dose' not on his next visit but on a later one.
I am satisfied that Shipman visited Mrs Wharmby on Wednesday, 18th
July. Her name is recorded in his visits book and Shipman said on the MCCD counterfoil that he had seen her alive on that day. Mrs Cowan says that someone told her that during that visit, Shipman had given Mrs Wharmby an injection. It is quite possible that he gave her an injection every time he came, if she was in severe pain. Mrs Harris does not recall that she was told that Shipman gave an injection that day, but was told that Shipman had stayed at the house until Mrs Wharmby had died. It is not clear for how long he stayed. Shipman would have been unlikely to stay with Mrs Wharmby for a long period, as he would have other patients to attend to. It is likely that Mrs Wharmby died within the hour. If Shipman had given a lethal dose of opiate intramuscularly, death would have followed within about an hour.
I do not think I can reach a positive decision in this case. Although there are real causes for suspicion, I think it would be unsafe for me to rely on the granddaughters' recollections of what they were told to the extent necessary for me to reach the conclusion that Shipman deliberately caused or hastened Mrs Wharmby's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001