The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Charles Henry Wood
Introduction
Mr Charles Henry Wood died at his home, 68 Marlborough Road, Hyde on Saturday, 2nd
February 1980 at the age of 83. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was senility.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the available cremation forms, the death of Mr Wood was not suspicious. The police did not investigate the death and there has been no inquest.
The Inquiry has attempted to contact relatives of Mr Wood to ascertain the circumstances of his death, but has failed to do so. Consequently, the Inquiry has no witness evidence. Mr Wood's medical records have not survived. The Inquiry does, however, have the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil completed by Shipman, his visits book for 1980 and a copy of the cremation forms.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
The Inquiry has no information about Mr Wood's personal circumstances or state of health prior to his death. It is not known whether he suffered the gradual decline which would justify the certification of 'senility' as the cause of death.
Shipman completed cremation Form B and stated that the death occurred at 6am on 2nd February 1980, in the presence of Mr Wood's son, who had nursed him during his last illness. The Inquiry has established that Mr Wood junior died some years ago.
Shipman stated that he had last seen Mr Wood about two weeks before his death, on 18th January, and this information also appears on the MCCD counterfoil. Mr Wood was said to have been in a coma for about 12 hours and that information apparently came from his son, who lived at the same address.
Cremation Form A, which was completed by Mr Wood's son, as the nearest surviving relative, also states that the death occurred at 6am.
Shipman's visits book records a visit on the day of death but this could have been the visit which, according to Form B, was made about three hours after the death. The visits book does not contain any reference to any earlier visits to Mr Wood between 1st
January and the date of death; in particular, it does not confirm a visit on 18th
January.
There is no further evidence available to the Inquiry.
Conclusion
It appears to me that this death was probably due to natural causes. Mr Wood's son lived with him and was said to be present at the death. Shipman does not appear to have visited before the death. However, in the absence of evidence from a witness with knowledge of the circumstances of death, it is impossible to exclude entirely the possibility that Shipman was involved, particularly where the information available to the Inquiry is reliant in the main on documentation completed by Shipman himself.
The absence of any reference to a visit on 18th
January in the visits book is puzzling. It is possible that Shipman visited on that day but did not record it in his book. It is also possible that he invented a visit to create the impression that he was in a position to certify the cause of death. A further possibility is that Mr Wood was seen by Shipman at the surgery, although, given his age, this seems unlikely. It is clear from many cases investigated by the Inquiry that Shipman was far from scrupulous in the way he carried out his duties of certification. However, this single factor does not give rise to suspicion that he might have caused or hastened the death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001