The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Olive Winston
Introduction
Mrs Olive Winston died at The Sycamores, a residential home for the elderly, Victoria Street, Hyde on Wednesday, 12th
October 1983 at the age of 93. She was a patient of Shipman and thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
Mrs Hilda Jeffries, Mrs Winston's daughter, is named in the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') as the informant in relation to her death. The Inquiry obtained a draft statement from Mrs Jeffries but unfortunately she has since died. The Inquiry has also interviewed Mrs Lindsey Gunning, whose husband is Mrs Winston's grandson, and she has confirmed the accuracy of most of Mrs Jeffries' draft statement.
The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1983 and the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Mrs Winston's medical records have not survived and there are no relevant records from The Sycamores.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Winston enjoyed good health until the last few months of her life. About two months before her death, she suffered an episode, which may well have been a stroke. She appeared to have an 'absence' and did not respond when spoken to. Shipman was called and while he was examining her she began to shake. He arranged her admission to Tameside General Hospital. She made a partial recovery during the next two weeks but, on discharge, was transferred to The Sycamores. Mrs Jeffries visited her there each day, but Mrs Winston did not settle. She was unhappy and wanted to return home. She ate very little and lost weight.
Mrs Jeffries recalled that, about two weeks before her death, Mrs Winston fell out of bed and banged her head on her bedside table. She was admitted to hospital for three days and discharged back to The Sycamores. Following her return, she was confined to bed and remained so until her death.
Mrs Gunning visited Mrs Winston three or four days before she died. Mrs Winston was lying in bed and did not seem to recognise her. Her breathing was laboured and Mrs Gunning did not think she would live long.
Mrs Jeffries visited Mrs Winston on the morning of 11th
October and again in the evening. By that time, Mrs Winston was very weak and one of the care assistants said that she was 'sinking'. The care assistant predicted that Mrs Winston would die before morning and Mrs Jeffries thought she was right. As far as Mrs Jeffries was aware, Shipman did not visit Mrs Winston on 11th
October.
The Day of the Death
At about 7am on 12th
October 1983, a member of staff from The Sycamores telephoned Mrs Jeffries to say that her mother had died. Mrs Jeffries had the impression that the death had just been discovered. She went to The Sycamores to see her mother and noticed that her wedding ring was missing. It was never found.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman claimed that he had last seen Mrs Winston alive on 11th
October 1983, the day before the death. He said that he had seen the body after death. He noted that there would not be a post-mortem examination. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 12th
October 1983.
Mrs Winston's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for either 11th
or 12th
October. However, her name does appear in the visits book for Monday, 10th
October. It seems likely that Shipman made an error on the MCCD counterfoil when he claimed that he saw Mrs Winston on 11th
October.
Conclusion
I am satisfied that Mrs Winston died as the result of natural causes.
The evidence suggests that Mrs Winston's health deteriorated suddenly about two months before her death and that she declined gradually thereafter. It appears that, in the period preceding her death, she was very weak and her death was expected.
There is no evidence that Shipman saw Mrs Winston on the day or during the night before her death. Mrs Jeffries spent the evening of 11th
October with her mother and, when she left, Mrs Winston was still alive although deteriorating. It would be most unusual for Shipman to visit an elderly persons' home during the night. In my view there is no reason to suspect that Shipman was involved in this death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001