The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Maureen Whittaker
Introduction
Mrs Maureen Whittaker died at Hyde Nursing Home, Grange Road South, Hyde on Monday, 16th
December 1996 at the age of 62. She had been a patient of Shipman since February 1996 when she moved to Hyde Nursing Home. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was respiratory failure due to chronic obstructive airways disease.
There has been no police investigation and no inquest into this death.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Margaret Doyle (Mrs Whittaker's daughter), Ms Yvonne Greer, Mr David Jewitt, Ms Sandra Berry and Ms Elizabeth Williams (all registered general nurses at Hyde Nursing Home) and Ms Karen Lee (a care assistant at Hyde Nursing Home). The Inquiry has also had access to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), Mrs Whittaker's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Whittaker was in poor health in the years leading up to her death. She suffered a heart attack in 1989 and had recurrent problems with a collapsed lung. For some time, she was nursed in bed at home by her husband. Her breathing was very bad and she used an oxygen cylinder. In October 1995, Mr Whittaker became ill and thereafter the family provided nursing care for his wife. Mr Whittaker died in December 1995. Shortly afterwards, in February 1996, Mrs Whittaker was admitted to Hyde Nursing Home.
Following her admission to the nursing home, Mrs Whittaker was registered as a patient of Shipman. He first saw her on 20th
February 1996. He noted her history of airways disease and collapsed lung. Her took her blood pressure. Within a short time, Shipman had prescribed an oxygen cylinder to help Mrs Whittaker's breathing. Members of the staff at Hyde Nursing Home remember Mrs Whittaker because she continued to smoke cigarettes despite her illness. Ms Williams recalls that Mrs Whittaker's condition deteriorated quickly and that she became frail during her time at the nursing home. Mrs Doyle, who is a nurse, worked an occasional shift at Hyde Nursing Home. She recalls that her mother's condition stabilised.
The Events Leading up to Death
Mrs Doyle returned from a week's holiday on Friday, 13th
December 1996. The following day, her sister, Mrs Carol McVittie, telephoned to tell her that their mother was unwell and Shipman had been asked to call. Later that day, Mrs McVittie told Mrs Doyle that she had been present when Shipman visited at 4.30pm that day. He had diagnosed a chest infection with fluid on the lungs and had suggested that this might indicate heart failure. The possibility of hospital admission had been discussed. Mrs Whittaker herself did not wish to be admitted. Shipman agreed, saying that admission would serve no useful purpose, as she was chronically ill. Mrs McVittie told Mrs Doyle that Shipman did not give their mother any medication during the visit, but prescribed a diuretic. He said he would visit again the following Monday.
Mrs Whittaker's name appears in Shipman's duty doctor diary for Saturday, 14th
December 1996 and there is an entry in the computerised medical records for that date which records as follows:
'Examn. of respiratory system
appears to be in che enalapril lasix 20'
.
The entry appears to contain a typographical error and the reference to
'che'
should probably read 'chf' which is congestive heart failure. Enalapril and Lasix would be appropriate medication for that condition.
Mrs Doyle visited her mother on the evening of Saturday, 14th
December and stayed all night. Mrs Whittaker was clearly very unwell. The family realised that her death was imminent. A member of the family stayed with her all the time. She became increasingly restless and agitated. Mrs Doyle stayed with her mother again on Sunday night, 15th
December. Before she left the next morning, she asked the nursing staff to ask Shipman to give her mother some morphine to settle her down.
Mrs Doyle says that Shipman visited her mother at about 1.30pm on 16th
December and that her sister, Mrs McVittie, was present. Shipman said that Mrs Whittaker was not expected to make a recovery, that her oral medication should be stopped and she should be kept comfortable. He said that he would call back later that day after surgery and would prescribe morphine if Mrs Whittaker remained agitated.
Mrs Whittaker's name appears in Shipman's visits book as a 'revisit' for that date and the first entry for 16th
December in the computerised medical records coincides with Mrs Doyle's recollection and reads as follows:
'Terminal care
char
(
sic
)
relatives withdraw rx unconcious
(
sic
)
'
.
The word 'char' should read 'chat'. This entry suggests that it was the relatives who decided to withdraw medication, whereas Mrs Doyle was under the impression that this was Shipman's advice.
Mrs Doyle visited her mother at about 6pm on 16th
December. She was unconscious and breathing with 'Cheyne-Stokes' respiration. Dr John Grenville has described this in his generic evidence to the Inquiry. The breathing is cyclic and becomes shallower; it appears to be on the point of stopping when it returns and increases in depth. It is a sign that death is imminent.
Mrs Whittaker died at about 8pm. At about 8.20pm, Shipman arrived at the home to see Mrs Whittaker but was told that she had died. The final entry in the computerised medical records for 16th
December 1996 reads as follows:
'O/E - dead
2010 all re; atives
(
sic
)
there resp fail copd'
.
The word 'relatives' has been mistyped. Shipman noted that the cause of death was respiratory failure due to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. This expression is used interchangeably with chronic obstructive airways disease.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD. He said that he had last seen Mrs Whittaker alive on the day of her death. He certified that the cause of death was respiratory failure due to chronic obstructive airways disease. He said that the interval between the onset of respiratory failure and death was approximately ten hours and that the interval between the onset of chronic obstructive airways disease and death was six years. He said that ischaemic heart disease had contributed to the death. The MCCD is dated 16th
December 1996.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered Mrs Whittaker's medical records and concluded that her death did not give rise to suspicion.
Conclusion
I am satisfied that Mrs Whittaker died of natural causes, as certified by Shipman.
Mrs Whittaker was clearly extremely unwell for a number of years before her death. She had chronic breathing difficulties for which she required oxygen from a cylinder. According to the staff at Hyde Nursing Home, her condition deteriorated during her time there and members of her family agree that she was very ill in the days leading to her death. Her death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
The only possible cause for suspicion in this case arises from the fact that Shipman last saw Mrs Whittaker alive on the day of her death. Shipman appears to have visited at about 1.30pm. There is no evidence that he gave any medication at that time and the evidence suggests that he refused or postponed Mrs Doyle's request that he should give Mrs Whittaker some morphine. As Mrs Whittaker's respiratory function was already severely compromised, any dose of opiate would probably have had the effect of hastening her death.
It appears likely that Mrs Whittaker died before Shipman returned that day. Mrs Doyle says that Shipman was not present during the two hour period before the death. Mrs Doyle was with her mother during that time and has described Cheyne-Stokes respiration. I think the possibility that Shipman gave Mrs Whittaker a dose of an opiate drug or a strong sedative can be ruled out.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001