The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Muriel Elsie Wilson
Introduction
Mrs Muriel Elsie Wilson died at Norbury House, a residential home for the elderly, Great Norbury Street, Hyde on Thursday, 2nd
July 1992 at the age of 87. Shipman had been her general practitioner from the time that she moved to Norbury House in 1985. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Samuel William Smethurst and Mr Eric Smethurst, Mrs Wilson's brothers, and from Mrs Julia Anne Mackie, who was the registered owner and manager of Norbury House at the time of Mrs Wilson's death.
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, the cremation certificate, Shipman's visits book for 1992 and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer diary, as well as the register of residents from Norbury House. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Wilson's handwritten and computerised general practitioner records, the former having been recovered from Shipman's home by the police.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Wilson was admitted to Norbury House from her home in Acre Street, Denton on 29th
May 1985. The Norbury House register records that she was a pleasant, self-caring lady who was mobile with a Zimmer frame. She had a history of angina, shingles and diverticulitis.
Mrs Wilson's hospital and general practitioner records are consistent with this history and the same medical conditions appear to have continued after her admission to Norbury House.
In early 1992, Mrs Wilson had a cardiac pacemaker fitted. In June 1992, it appears that Shipman asked Dr H H Wan, a consultant in geriatric medicine, to visit Mrs Wilson. Dr Wan's letter to Shipman suggested that Mrs Wilson's cardiac symptoms had been overtaken by the severe abdominal symptoms from which she was then suffering. Dr Wan suspected that she might have cancer of the colon. She was to be admitted for further investigation.
Soon after this, on 23rd
June 1992, Shipman recorded in the general practitioner records that he had visited Mrs Wilson at the home, found her confused and dehydrated, and noted that she was to receive terminal nursing care. He recorded that she was to be given Melleril twice daily and that he would see her the following day. Melleril is a sedative or antipsychotic drug, probably given in this case to treat Mrs Wilson's confusion. There is an entry in Shipman's visits book to confirm that he saw Mrs Wilson on that day.
There is also an entry in Shipman's visits book suggesting that he saw Mrs Wilson on the next day, Wednesday, 24th
June, but there is no note of this either in the handwritten or in the computerised records. There is another entry in the visits book for Friday, 26th
June but again there is no corresponding entry in the medical records. The likelihood is that these visits took place but that Shipman made no clinical note of the consultations.
On Monday, 29th
June 1992, Shipman apparently visited Mrs Wilson at the home and made the following brief entry in the handwritten records:
'Unconscious. No problems.
Terminal nursing care'
.
This is the last entry in the medical records relating to any consultation with Mrs Wilson. There is a corresponding entry in the visits book. Mrs Wilson's name also appears in the visits book for 1st
July, although there is no corresponding entry in the medical records.
Mrs Mackie's witness statement confirms Mrs Wilson's abdominal problems and confusion. Mrs Wilson's brothers both recall that she was very ill before she died.
The Day of the Death
The Norbury House register records that Mrs Wilson died at about 4.15am on 2nd
July 1992 and that a general practitioner confirmed the death. Her family and Shipman were informed of her death.
Within the Lloyd George folder containing Mrs Wilson's general practitioner records is a docket completed by the deputising doctor who had attended to confirm the death.
Mrs Wilson's name appears in Shipman's visits book for Thursday, 2nd
July 1992 but immediately after her name is a reference to the undertakers, Massey's. It seems likely that Shipman visited the funeral parlour to examine the body with a view to completing Form B of the cremation certificate. It seems highly unlikely that Shipman was called out during the night to treat Mrs Wilson shortly before her death.
Mrs Mackie recalls that she was present at Mrs Wilson's death. She also says that Mrs Wilson's brother visited her on the eve of her death and stayed with her through the night until she died at 4.15am. This appears to be inconsistent with the entry in the Norbury House register recording that Mrs Wilson's family were informed of her death. Moreover, both of Mrs Wilson's brothers have told the Inquiry that they were not present at the death and probably did not visit on the eve of the death. It seems likely, therefore, that Mrs Mackie's evidence is wrong on these points.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that Mrs Wilson had died at Norbury House on 2nd
July 1992. He said that he had last seen Mrs Wilson alive on 1st
July. That is consistent with the entry in the visits book. He said that the cause of death was old age and that ischaemic heart disease had contributed to the death. He said that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He there recorded, correctly, that Mrs Wilson had died at 4.15am on 2nd
July 1992. He said that he had attended her during her last illness for four days and that he had last seen her alive 12 hours before her death. These entries may well be correct. He said that he had seen her body eight hours after her death and that he had carried out an external examination of it. He said that Mrs Wilson had been in a coma for 72 hours and that his views as to the mode and cause of death were based on his own observations. He said that Mrs Wilson was nursed during her last illness by the staff at the home and that the matron at the home was present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered the contents of the medical records and the information contained in the cremation forms. He found that the death was not suspicious on either count.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Wilson died of natural causes.
Mrs Wilson had a history of heart problems but, in the weeks leading up to her death, she developed a persistent abdominal complaint, which caused her to become dehydrated and aggravated her confused state. It does not appear that the abdominal problems were ever fully investigated as Mrs Wilson's condition deteriorated to such an extent that only terminal care was appropriate. Her death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman saw Mrs Wilson in the period immediately before her death. The visits book, the MCCD counterfoil and Form B all suggest that he last saw her on 1st
July. Shipman usually carried out his routine visits between about noon and 3.30pm. As Mrs Wilson died shortly after 4am, it would appear that she lived for at least 12 hours after Shipman's last visit. He cannot have given her a lethal dose of an opioid drug at that visit, as she would have died within an hour had he done so. It is most unlikely that Shipman would have visited Mrs Wilson in the middle of the night. A deputising doctor was called out to confirm the death.
I have also considered the possibility that Shipman had over-sedated Mrs Wilson by giving her large doses of a drug such as Largactil. It does not appear to me that this could have happened. First, Shipman had prescribed Melleril which was to be administered by the staff at the home. There does not appear to have been any need or justification for further medication. Also, it does not appear that Shipman visited every day, as would have been necessary if he was to keep Mrs Wilson in an unconscious state by over-sedation.
I see no reason to suspect that Shipman was unlawfully involved in Mrs Wilson's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001