The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Violet Mary Whittaker
Introduction
Mrs Violet Mary Whittaker is certified as having died at her home, 230 Market Street, Hyde on Tuesday, 23rd
June 1981 at the age of 59, although it is possible that she died on the previous day. She was probably a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was respiratory failure due to chronic bronchitis with emphysema and asthma.
Mrs Whittaker had two sons, Mr Fred Whittaker and Mr William Whittaker, and a daughter, Mrs Dorothy Ann Hamling. In June 2001, Mr Fred Whittaker telephoned the police to inform them that Shipman had certified the cause of his mother's death. The police referred the death to the Inquiry.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Fred Whittaker, his wife, Mrs Betty Whittaker, and Mr William Whittaker. The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1981 and to the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). The cremation documentation and Mrs Whittaker's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
It appears that Mrs Whittaker, who was separated from her husband and lived alone, had occasional contact with her family but was in regular contact with the staff employed by Charles Robb and Son Limited, an undertakers firm with premises located below her flat. It has not been possible to trace any employees who knew her.
The evidence of the family suggests that Mrs Whittaker did not enjoy good health. When she was in her thirties, she underwent an operation for a duodenal ulcer. She had had a problem with the withdrawal from drugs prescribed by her doctor. She was a heavy smoker and had a persistent cough and breathing difficulties, which prevented her from walking far.
Mr Fred Whittaker last saw his mother a few months before her death. She did not appear to be seriously ill, although she was breathing heavily. She told him that her doctor had prescribed her 'water tablets' and when she had finished the tablets her lungs had filled with water and she had been seriously ill. From this description, it seems likely that she was suffering from congestive heart failure with fluid retention when her medication was withdrawn.
The Day of the Death
Mr William Whittaker says that he learned of his mother's death while he was at work on 23rd
June 1981. He understood that her death had been discovered that day by one of the undertakers' employees. He recalls that he and his brother went to their mother's flat on the following day. They found her lying on top of her bed dressed in her day clothes looking extremely peaceful as if asleep. They were told by one of the employees at the undertakers that their mother had been heard on the day before her death but not on the day of her death. A plate of food was found in the refrigerator, covered with another plate. Mr William Whittaker deduced that his mother had made a meal, felt unwell and put it in the refrigerator before going to bed. He thought his mother must have died in her sleep.
Mr Fred Whittaker recalls that he was informed of the death on Friday, 26th
June 1981, three days after he believes it was discovered. He thinks that he went to the flat with his brother on Monday, 29th
June and that the body was still lying in the bed. It is likely that Mr Fred Whittaker is wrong in his recollection. It is very unlikely that his mother's body would have lain in bed for six days even if, as he suggests, he and his brother had not consented to its removal to a chapel of rest. According to Mr Fred Whittaker, there was a large pan on the stove on top of which was a covered plate. It was Mrs Whittaker's habit to prepare her evening meal at lunchtime and to keep it warm on a pan of water on the stove covered by a bowl. This suggested to Mr Fred Whittaker that his mother had died after lunchtime.
Mrs Betty Whittaker went to Hyde on several occasions after Friday, 26th
June to assist with the arrangements. She recalls that two members of the undertakers' staff told her that Mrs Whittaker usually made them a cup of tea each morning when they called up to her. On the day of her death there was no reply and when they entered the flat they found Mrs Whittaker lying dead on the bed. They thought that she might have felt ill and gone to lie down on the bed. The gas fire and radio were on.
Certification
Shipman completed the counterfoil to the MCCD on 24th
June 1981 and stated that he last saw Mrs Whittaker alive on 30th
May 1981, which was more than three weeks before her death. Shipman might have seen Mrs Whittaker at the surgery on that date. It does not appear from his visits book that he visited her then or had visited her at any time in May or June. Shipman also claimed that he had seen the body after death. He might well have done. Mrs Whittaker's name appears in his visits book for Wednesday, 24th
June and this entry could well represent the visit at which he saw the body. The causes of death listed were respiratory failure due to chronic bronchitis with emphysema and asthma. Ischaemic heart disease and congestive heart failure were said to have contributed to the death.
Conclusion
It seems to me that this was probably a natural death.
Very little is known of Mrs Whittaker's medical history but it appears that she was in poor health and probably suffered from several of the conditions mentioned on the MCCD counterfoil, any one of which could have led to her death. The evidence as to the circumstances in which she was found is not clear, but it seems quite possible that she suffered an acute respiratory episode, lay down on her bed to rest and later died.
There is no evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Whittaker in the days preceding her death. It would appear that he did not visit her at home regularly. He himself claimed that he last saw her three weeks before her death. If he did, it would appear that this was probably at a surgery appointment rather than a visit. He appears to have been familiar with her health problems, as the causes to which he attributed her death did not come as a surprise to members of her family.
It is unusual for Shipman to state on an MCCD that he had not seen a patient within 14 days before the death. Here he acknowledged that he had not seen Mrs Whittaker for over three weeks before her death. That would tend to suggest that Shipman was not anxious to avoid a post-mortem examination. It may be that he spoke to the coroner to seek permission to certify the cause of death. Shipman and other doctors, as well as some registrars and coroners, seem to have been under the impression that a doctor was not qualified to certify the cause of a death unless he or she had seen the patient within 14 days before death. That is not essential provided the doctor has attended the patient in the last illness and has seen the body after death.
Very little is known about the circumstances of this death. It is possible that Shipman was involved in the death but, in my view, it is likely that Mrs Whittaker died of natural causes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001