The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
William Hill Wareing
Introduction
The Reverend William Hill Wareing died at his home, 41 Newton Street, Hyde on Thursday, 17th
May 1979 at the age of 61. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was an adenocarcinoma of the lung.
The police have not investigated this death and no inquest has taken place.
In September 2001, the Inquiry published a list of deaths, certified by Shipman, for which it had not been possible to trace any relative of the deceased. In response to that advertisement, the Revd Wareing's daughter, Mrs Maureen Dorita Wareing, contacted the Inquiry.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Wareing. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1979, the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). The medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
At the time of his death, the Revd Wareing was living with his wife. He enjoyed very good health until about 18 months before his death, when he had an embolism for which he was admitted to Ashton General Hospital. He continued in his work as a minister of religion until some time in 1978. In December 1978, part of one of his lungs was removed at Wythenshawe Hospital. Following his discharge from hospital, shortly before Christmas 1978, he seemed to make a good recovery. He was, however, quite frail and could not leave the house without assistance. Not long after, he was readmitted to hospital for further tests when it was found that he had lung cancer. He returned home and Shipman visited him regularly.
Mrs Wareing recalls that she visited her father about a week before he died. Her mother explained that Shipman had told them that her father had only about a week to live, as the cancer had spread to his liver. It may be that Mrs Wareing's father was becoming jaundiced and that Shipman noticed the early signs of this. Mrs Wareing was quite surprised and shocked by this and asked Shipman how he knew this without performing tests. Shipman gave no explanation but simply replied, 'Because I, my dear, am a doctor and you have no medical knowledge'. Mrs Wareing was unable to accept the poor prognosis because only the week before, her father had been in such good spirits.
After hearing Shipman's opinion, Mrs Wareing stayed at her parents' house until the death. During this week her father's bed was moved downstairs into the living room because this was the warmest room in the house. Mrs Wareing recalls that, during that week, Shipman visited her father at least once every day, sometimes more. She recalls that, some time during that week, Shipman handed her a prescription for morphine, which he told her to collect from the local chemist. She recalls that the pharmacist commented that it was not normal practice for a patient's relative to collect the prescription. In fact, there would be nothing unusual about such a practice. Mrs Wareing says that, during the last week, she was not usually present in the room when Shipman saw her father. A district nurse also attended her father during that week.
The Revd Wareing spent most of that week in bed. He slept a great deal. Mrs Wareing recalls that he seemed to have hallucinations and would ramble incoherently, which was distressing, as he had been quite lucid until then.
The 1979 visits book records that Shipman visited the Revd Wareing on 19th
April, 3rd
May, 4th
May, 8th
May, 10th
May, 11th
May, 14th
May, 15th
May and 16th
May. These regular visits are consistent with the degree of care necessary during the last stages of a terminal illness.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Wareing recalls that, on the afternoon of 17th
May 1979, her mother told her that she was going to sit with her husband for a while to keep him company. After about an hour, she came out of the room and said that her husband had died. Mrs Wareing cannot clearly recall Shipman visiting her father but thinks that he was there at some time that day. The visits book suggests that he had visited. However, Mrs Wareing does not say that he visited during the last hour when her mother was last with her father.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been recovered. On that Shipman stated that he had last seen the Revd Wareing alive on the day of his death. He stated that the cause of death was an adenocarcinoma of the lung. He had seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination.
The death certificate recorded that Mrs Gertrude Wareing, widow of the Revd Wareing, was present at the death.
Conclusion
It is clear from the evidence of Mrs Wareing that her father had reached the terminal phase of his illness. His death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
It appears that Shipman visited very frequently in the last week of the Revd Wareing's life. It seems likely that Shipman prescribed morphine for the relief of pain and distress. That would be entirely appropriate.
Although it appears that Shipman visited the Revd Wareing on the day of his death, there is no evidence that the visit took place within the hour before the death. If he did not visit, there is therefore no reason to suspect that he administered an excessive dose of opiate with the intention of hastening the death. These events took place a long time ago and it is possible thatShipman did visit within a short time of the death and hastened the death by giving a lethal dose of morphine. However, as Mrs Wareing does not recall a visit shortly before the death, it seems to me far more likely that the Revd Wareing died a natural death due to the cause certified by Shipman.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001