The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mark Wimpeney
Introduction
Mr Mark Wimpeney died at his home, 44 Peel Street, Hyde on Tuesday, 6th
October 1981 at the age of 86. It is not known whether, or for how long, he had been a patient of Shipman, but at the time of his death, Shipman had been practising in Hyde for four years. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Wimpeney's death was senility.
The Inquiry has had access to the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and Shipman's visits book for 1981.
Despite extensive efforts on the part of the Inquiry, it has not been possible to trace all of Mr Wimpeney's children. It has not been possible to persuade those relatives whom the Inquiry has contacted to provide evidence to the Inquiry. It seems that their recollection is, in any event, very limited. Accordingly, very little is known about the circumstances of the death.
The Evidence
The death certificate shows that Mr Wimpeney was a retired ring room overlooker.
Shipman's visits book indicates that, in the weeks preceding Mr Wimpeney's death, Shipman visited him on 21st
and 30th
September and 5th
October. Mr Wimpeney's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for Tuesday, 6th
October, the day of the death.
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. Shipman completed that on 6th
October, stating that the death had occurred on that day and that he had last seen Mr Wimpeney alive on the day before the death. He said he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination. The cause of death was senility.
Conclusion
Unfortunately, it has not been possible to discover any information from members of Mr Wimpeney's family as to the circumstances of the death. The information available to the Inquiry has been insufficient for me to reach any conclusion about whether the death was natural or whether Shipman was unlawfully involved.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001