The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Jessie Irene Wagstaff
Introduction
Mrs Jessie Irene Wagstaff died at her home, 97 Two Trees Lane, Denton on Sunday, 15th
April 1984 at the age of 70. She was, until her death, a patient of Dr Geoffrey Bills who practised at the Donneybrook Surgery with Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was cardiac failure due to coronary thrombosis.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed advertisements in a number of newspapers, publishing a list of cases in which the Inquiry had only limited information as to the circumstances of the death and in which no relatives had been traced. In response to that advertisement, the Inquiry was contacted by Mrs Wagstaff's stepson, Mr Gary Wagstaff, and her stepdaughter, Mrs Karen Blackburn. Mr Wagstaff wrote the following:
'Jesse Irene Wagstaff...was my Stepmother and I can still remember some circumstances surrounding her death on 15/04/84
.
I answered the door to Dr Shipman when he came to our house whilst my Stepmother was still alive, but when he left, she had died of a large dose of Morphine'
.
The detailed statement which Mr Wagstaff has now provided is not in all respects consistent with the brief account he gave initially. In particular, he does not identify the doctor who came to see his stepmother as Shipman and he does not mention that the doctor gave morphine.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Wagstaff, from his brother Mr Brian Wagstaff, and from Mrs Blackburn. The Inquiry has also had access to the visits book and duty doctor transfer book for 1984 and to the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). The medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
At the time of her death, Mrs Wagstaff was living with her husband, Mr Harold Wagstaff, and stepson, Mr Gary Wagstaff. She had retired from work as a retail supervisor in 1984 and had been in reasonable health for her age. She did, however, suffer from fluid retention and swollen ankles. It may be that she had congestive heart failure. Despite this, she could walk to the local shops and managed the housework and cooking. Mr Gary Wagstaff recalls that his stepmother took two tablets every day. One was for water retention and the other was a potassium supplement called Slow K.
Mr Brian Wagstaff has told the Inquiry that Mrs Wagstaff had been diagnosed with a rare heart condition as a child but was not taking medication for that at the time of her death. He recalls that she had been told that she should drink two bottles of Guinness a day. He says that, some time after Christmas 1983 (he cannot now recall exactly when), Mrs Wagstaff became ill and spent at least part of the time in bed. He also says that, for some time before her death (it is not known for how long), a doctor visited Mrs Wagstaff each morning and evening to give her an injection. He does not know what the injections were or why they were needed. Mrs Blackburn recalls that Mrs Wagstaff's husband brought a bed downstairs for his wife.
Mr Gary Wagstaff says that Mrs Wagstaff seemed well in the days leading up to her death and was no different from usual. He makes no reference to any injections.
The Day of the Death
Mr Gary Wagstaff got up on Sunday, 15th
April 1984 at about 10am. When he went downstairs, his father told him that Mrs Wagstaff had been complaining of chest pain and that he had contacted the doctor. Mr Gary Wagstaff went into the front room where he saw Mrs Wagstaff lying on the settee, covered with a blanket. She looked pale and unwell and was moaning with pain.
Some time later that day, the doctor arrived. Mr Gary Wagstaff cannot now recall whether this was in the morning or afternoon but he recalls that it was daylight. Mr Brian Wagstaff remembers visiting the house and being told by his father that a doctor was due to visit his mother at 6pm. His father would not let him see Mrs Wagstaff because she was so ill. I observe that, if Mr Wagstaff had made his request for a visit at or before 10am, it seems strange that the doctor was not expected until 6pm.
Mr Gary Wagstaff says that it was he who answered the door to the doctor. He did not recognise the doctor but describes him as a thin, stooped man, who was not tall. He was wearing glasses and Mr Gary Wagstaff thinks that he may also have had a beard. He cannot remember the doctor's name. Mr Gary Wagstaff showed the doctor into the front room where his stepmother lay. Mr Harold Wagstaff also went into the front room with the doctor. Mr Gary Wagstaff then went and made himself a cup of tea, which he drank in the living room. His father then joined him and told him that the doctor had said that he wanted to be alone with Mrs Wagstaff and that he was going to give her something to take away her pain. Mr Gary Wagstaff says that he had noticed that Mrs Wagstaff's moaning seemed to increase when she was left alone with the doctor. The sounds continued for about 20 minutes, then all went quiet. Some 20 minutes later, the doctor came into the living room and told them that Mrs Wagstaff had died. Mr Gary Wagstaff says that he was shocked and his father was heartbroken at the news. After a few moments, the doctor 'muttered something' and left.
Mr Brian Wagstaff recalls that he was driving home after having visited his father's house when his brother, riding a bicycle, flagged him down and told him that Mrs Wagstaff had died. Mr Brian Wagstaff returned to his father's house. His father told him that the doctor had added some Valium to his mother's usual injection to help her sleep and that she had then died.
Mr Harold Wagstaff spoke to Mrs Blackburn on the day of the funeral. She recalls that he told her that the doctor had asked Mrs Wagstaff if she wanted an injection to relieve the pain and then she had died.
The duty doctor transfer book reveals that Shipman was on duty on Sunday, 15th
April. There are no entries relating to Mrs Wagstaff in his visits book for any day in April 1984, including the day of death. However, this does not mean that Shipman did not visit Mrs Wagstaff. He seems to have used his visits book mainly as an aide memoire during ordinary working days and often did not enter the names of patients whom he attended in an emergency or out of hours.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman recorded that the death occurred on 15th
April 1984 and that he had last seen Mrs Wagstaff alive on that day. The cause of death was cardiac failure due to coronary thrombosis. He had seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination.
Conclusion
As the medical records have not survived, I am unable to discover the nature of Mrs Wagstaff's illness. It appears that she was very unwell and was spending virtually all her time in bed. That the bed had been brought downstairs suggests a high degree of dependency.
It is quite possible that she was suffering from some form of cancer but that her husband did not speak openly about it to the rest of the family. If she were, that would explain why she needed twice daily injections. They would have been for the relief of pain. It would also explain why the call for the doctor was not treated as an emergency. Had Mrs Wagstaff's pain been of sudden onset, one would have expected the doctor to attend quickly or to send an ambulance. I think it very unlikely that the daily injections were of a diuretic. Such medication is given orally save in an emergency. Whatever the nature of the underlying condition, the witness evidence suggests that Mrs Wagstaff's condition deteriorated quite noticeably on the day of her death. She was complaining of chest pain and looked pale. It is possible (although I think unlikely) that she was suffering a heart attack.
It appears likely that the doctor who attended was Shipman. He was the Donneybrook doctor on duty that day. He signed the MCCD, saying that he had seen Mrs Wagstaff alive on the day of her death. As she was another doctor's patient, it seems most unlikely that Shipman would have signed the certificate if he had not seen her shortly before her death.
It appears that, for whatever reason, Mrs Wagstaff was in pain when Shipman arrived. It would have been quite appropriate for him to give some pain-relieving drug. Valium is usually given orally and helps a distressed patient to relax and sleep. In the early 1980s, Valium was sometimes given by intramuscular injection. It is not usually given intravenously, as it irritates the vein. We do not know how Shipman gave the injection on this occasion. Nor do we know what Mrs Wagstaff's usual injection contained. It is known that Shipman sometimes used a strong opiate such as morphine or diamorphine to kill his patients. A lethal dose of strong opiate given intravenously will usually kill within minutes. If given intramuscularly, a lethal dose will kill in about an hour.
I cannot reach any conclusion about whether Shipman caused or hastened Mrs Wagstaff's death. I do not know what was her underlying condition. It might well have been a terminal condition. I do not know how close she was to a natural death. I do not know what the injection contained. That Shipman said that it contained Valium does not help a great deal. He might have been telling the truth; he might not. If Mrs Wagstaff's underlying condition were cancer, I would be very suspicious about her sudden death certified by Shipman as due to cardiac failure due to a coronary thrombosis. I have come across other cases where Shipman has hastened the death of a patient who was seriously ill with cancer (although not yet in the terminal stages) and has passed the death off as due to a heart attack.
I regret that I cannot make any decision about this case. There are too many uncertainties.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001