The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Annie Watkins
Introduction
Mrs Annie Watkins died at her home, 46 Carter Place, Hyde on Monday, 17th
November 1986 at the age of 81. She had probably been a patient of Shipman since he moved to Hyde in 1977. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the right breast.
The Inquiry has taken statements from three of Mrs Watkins' friends and neighbours, Mrs Ethel Davies, Mrs Enid Holt and Miss Alwyn Holt (the daughter of Mrs Holt) and from Mrs Angela Beech (Mrs Watkins' home help). The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1986, the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Watkins was a widow and lived alone. She was an independent woman and very active. She seems to have enjoyed good health until she was found to have cancer of her right breast and had a mastectomy. The evidence as to when this occurred is conflicting. Mrs Davies recalls that Mrs Watkins was diagnosed with cancer in 1985 and died about two months after the mastectomy. Mrs Holt and her daughter recall that Mrs Watkins' cancer was diagnosed in 1982. They have all told the Inquiry that Mrs Watkins appeared to make a good recovery following her operation. Mrs Beech, the home help, says that Mrs Watkins was taking tamoxifen.
About 12 to 18 months before she died, Mrs Watkins broke her ankle in a fall. After that, she used a stick when walking.
Mrs Davies recalls that, in the last few weeks of her life, Mrs Watkins became very tired and lost her appetite. She seemed worn out. It would appear from Shipman's visits book that he visited Mrs Watkins on 14th
October and 11th
November. There is some evidence that Mrs Watkins was taken to Tameside General Hospital during the weekend of 14th
and 15th
November, possibly because she was in pain. However, it appears that she was allowed to return home.
The Day of the Death
Shipman's visits book shows an intention to visit Mrs Watkins on 17th
November.
Mrs Davies took a meal to Mrs Watkins at about 11am that day. She recalls that Mrs Watkins looked worse than when she had last seen her, a day or two before. She was still in bed, which was unusual as Mrs Watkins was an early riser. She did not want the food Mrs Davies had brought. Mrs Davies returned home.
Mrs Holt visited Mrs Watkins at about 1pm. She recalls that some of Mrs Watkins' other friends were also present. Mrs Watkins was in bed and appeared to be unconscious. Her breathing was very loud and 'rattly'. Mrs Holt stayed for much of the afternoon and then returned home to make her husband's evening meal. She and her husband returned to Mrs Watkins' flat at about 6pm. Mrs Holt says that, soon after her return, Shipman arrived. He was carrying a black bag and went straight into Mrs Watkins' bedroom. Mrs Holt says that she watched Shipman give Mrs Watkins an injection in the arm. He then said, 'I don't think she'll last the night but I'll be back at 10 o'clock for another injection'. He then left. Soon afterwards, Mrs Davies and her friend Ernie arrived, as did Miss Holt. The friends discussed who should stay with Mrs Watkins overnight and Miss Holt, who is a nurse and midwife, offered to do so. She went back home, promising to return to Mrs Watkins' at 11pm. Mrs Holt says that, at about 10pm, Shipman returned and she saw him give Mrs Watkins another injection. He said, 'If something happens, let me know right away, no matter what the time is. I don't think it will be long now'. Shipman then left. After about an hour, Mrs Watkins' noisy breathing stopped. The friends who were present went into the room and found she had died. Mrs Holt recalls that her daughter arrived a few minutes later and confirmed that Mrs Watkins had died. Miss Holt went to telephone Shipman. He arrived soon afterwards and examined Mrs Watkins. He told the friends that Mrs Watkins had had cancer and that it had got into her bones.
Mrs Davies recalls that she spent the afternoon at her own home and returned to Mrs Watkins' flat at about 6pm. A number of Mrs Watkins' friends were present, including Mrs Holt, her husband and daughter. Mrs Watkins was in bed and appeared to be in a coma. Mrs Davies does not think that a doctor had been during the day but is unsure and cannot say this for certain. All the friends sat in the lounge and from time to time Mrs Holt and her daughter would check Mrs Watkins' condition. Mrs Davies recalls that she could hear occasional moans. After a few hours, they heard a sound and Miss Holt said that 'that was the last one'. She went into the bedroom and returned to say that Mrs Watkins had died. Mrs Davies makes no reference to the attendance of a doctor either before or after the death. She recalls that the undertakers came at about midnight and removed the body, after which she and the other friends returned home.
Miss Holt, whose recollection is different to that of Mrs Davies, recalls that she visited Mrs Watkins either that afternoon or evening. She found Mrs Watkins unconscious in bed. Her breathing was very slow and heavy and was rattling. Miss Holt recalls thinking that Mrs Watkins would be dead within 24 hours. She was told that Shipman had visited earlier in the day and she thought he had done the right thing in leaving Mrs Watkins at home, as it appeared that she would not live long. She thought that Mrs Watkins might have had a stroke. Although she does not say so in her statement, it is apparent that she left the flat and arranged to return later that night.
Miss Holt says that she returned at about 11pm, a few minutes after Mrs Watkins had died. Miss Holt examined her briefly and went to telephone Shipman. While she was waiting for Shipman to arrive, Miss Holt looked at the medical records, which were lying on the bedside table. She noticed that Shipman had noted that he had given an injection of Largactil earlier that day. She thinks the dose was of 50mg but is not sure. She recalls that she was puzzled that he should have given this drug, which is often used as a sedative, as she had thought that Mrs Watkins had already been unconscious. When Shipman arrived, he saw Miss Holt looking at the records and told her that he had given the Largactil to ease Mrs Watkins' pain and to make her more comfortable. Miss Holt did not comment but thought it had been an unusual drug to give in the circumstances. She wondered whether Shipman had given the drug to 'assist the passing'.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman recorded that he had last seen Mrs Watkins alive on the day of her death. The cause of death was carcinomatosis secondary to carcinoma of the breast. He had seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination.
On Form B of the cremation certificate, Shipman recorded that death had occurred at 23.55 hours on 17th
November 1986. He stated that he had attended Mrs Watkins during her last illness for a period of 12 hours and that he last saw her alive three hours before her death, suggesting that he last saw her at about 9pm. He recorded that he saw the body about 20 minutes after death. The mode of death was said to be a coma lasting ten hours. He said that she was nursed by the district nurse and her neighbours. He recorded that no one was present at the moment of death, although neighbours checked her every five minutes and found her dead at 11.55pm.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker did not consider the death suspicious after consideration of the information contained in the cremation certificate.
Conclusion
It seems clear that Mrs Watkins' cancer had metastasised or spread. It is quite possible that her gradual decline in health in the weeks before her death was the result of the spread of cancer to one or more of her vital organs. If so, there would be a sound basis for certifying that the immediate cause of her death was carcinomatosis. It certainly seems that Mrs Watkins was in pain over the weekend before she died.
On the day of her death, it appears that Mrs Watkins was very ill but conscious in the morning, when Mrs Davies visited her. By early afternoon, she was unconscious. It is not known whether or at what time Shipman visited during the day. It seems likely that he did, as Mrs Watkins' name was in his visits book. That would suggest that he would probably visit her in the late morning or early afternoon. I suspect that Mrs Holt may be mistaken in thinking that Shipman visited at about 6pm. I think it more likely that he visited in the early afternoon. If he did visit during the day, as opposed to the evening, as I think likely, it seems likely that he gave an injection. It is possible that he found Mrs Watkins half awake but in pain and distress and gave her the dose of Largactil, which Miss Holt saw recorded in the medical notes. That might well have caused Mrs Watkins to fall into a deep sleep or unconsciousness. It is also possible that he gave a different drug, not the Largactil as recorded or that he gave more than he recorded. We do not know.
Mrs Holt suggests that Shipman gave an injection at about 10pm. She may well be right. Shipman himself said on Form B that he last saw Mrs Watkins alive at about 9pm but he might well be wrong about the time. So, of course, might Mrs Holt. I think Shipman probably gave an injection in the late evening. That was probably the second injection of the day. However, I cannot be sure of this. The evening injection, if there was one, might have been Largactil or it might have been something else. Whatever it was, it is hard to see why it was necessary, as it appears that Mrs Watkins was in a coma. It may be that Shipman thought that the effect of the lunchtime injection would expire and Mrs Watkins would have a bad night if he did not give some more sedative. However, a suspicion must arise that the evening injection was given not for the relief of pain or distress but in order to hasten the death. If the evening injection were of Largactil, it could have hastened the death if the dose was large and Mrs Watkins' respiratory drive was already diminished, as seems likely. A dose of opiate would probably have hastened the death. It is also possible that the injection was of something else entirely, such as a diuretic, to help Mrs Watkins' breathing, although this seems unlikely, as Miss Holt would probably have noticed this on the medical record.
It is clear that in the late evening Shipman did not give Mrs Watkins an intravenous injection of a lethal dose of opiate. I say that because Mrs Watkins lived for some time afterwards. A lethal injection given intravenously would have killed her within a few minutes. However, Shipman might have given a lethal injection of opiate intramuscularly, which would have caused death within about an hour. Alternatively, he could have given a sub-lethal dose of an opiate or a large dose of Largactil, either of which might well have depressed Mrs Watkins' respiration sufficiently to hasten her death. If he gave her any form of sedative, I would be suspicious that he did so with the intention of hastening the death rather than merely keeping Mrs Watkins comfortable. I say that particularly because Miss Holt did not think that any sedation was necessary. However, it is also possible that Mrs Watkins' death was unaffected by any drug she had been given. A further possibility is that Shipman gave a small dose of opiate or a modest dose of sedative (in good faith believing it to be the best way of ensuring that Mrs Watkins did not suffer during the night), which had the side effect of hastening her death. Such an action would not have been unlawful.
From this discussion, it will be apparent that, although I am suspicious, there are too many uncertainties in the evidence for me to be able to say whether Mrs Watkins' death was natural or whether it was hastened by an unlawful act of Shipman. In any event, it is clear that Mrs Watkins would not have lived much longer.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001