The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Annie Wilkinson
Introduction
Mrs Annie Wilkinson died at her home, 30 Rydall Avenue, Hyde on Thursday, 11th
January 1979 at the age of 81. It is not known whether she was registered as a patient of Shipman, who, at the time of her death, had been practising in Hyde for about 15 months. He certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia.
It has not been possible to obtain witness evidence about the circumstances of Mrs Wilkinson's death. The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1979. Mrs Wilkinson's medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
The only information about Mrs Wilkinson's background is that contained in the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), which records that she was a retired office cleaner and was the wife of Mr William Henry Wilkinson, a retired builder's labourer.
Mrs Wilkinson's name appears in Shipman's visits book for Tuesday, 9th
January 1979. Alongside her name and address appear the letters
'D/N'
, which is probably a reference to the district nurse. Her name does not appear in the visits book for the following day or indeed the day of the death, Thursday, 11th
January 1979.
Certification
The death certificate indicates that Mr Wilkinson, Mrs Wilkinson's husband, was present at the death.
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not been recovered, but the MCCD counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman stated that Mrs Wilkinson died of bronchopneumonia on 11th
January 1979. He claimed that he had last seen her alive on 10th
January 1979. He stated that another medical practitioner had seen the body after death. He said that a post-mortem examination would not take place. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 11th
January 1979.
Conclusion
So little is known about the circumstances of Mrs Wilkinson's death that I hesitate to reach any conclusion about whether Shipman was involved in the death. There is no positive evidence that he caused it and nothing to show that he did not. As Mrs Wilkinson's husband was present at the time of her death, it might appear less likely that anything untoward could have happened. In 1979, Shipman had already killed a number of patients but he was not so frequent a killer as he became in later years. I think I am able to say that it is likely that Mrs Wilkinson died a natural death. However, the possibility must remain open that she died at his hand.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001