The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Eric Wardle
Introduction
Mr Eric Wardle died at his home, 29 Strines Court, Hyde on Monday, 9th
January 1978 at the age of 60. It seems likely that Mr Wardle had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977, when he replaced Dr Bennett. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Wardle's death was right-sided cerebrovascular accident.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Wardle's daughters, Mrs Brenda Parr and Mrs Susan Tunnicliffe, and has had access to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil and the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'). Mr Wardle's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Wardle lived with his wife in sheltered accommodation. Their flat was supervised by a warden.
Mr Wardle contracted tuberculosis in the 1960s and spent long periods of time in hospital. His condition caused lasting damage to his lungs. He was breathless on exertion and was forced to retire from work on the grounds of ill health. He was not housebound but could walk only short distances. Mr Wardle regularly attended his doctor in connection with his lungs but he was otherwise well.
Mr Wardle's daughters did not notice any deterioration in his health prior to his death.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Parr recalls that, on Monday, 9th
January 1978, she received a telephone call, which she assumes was from her mother, to say that her father was ill. She and her husband went to her parents' flat. When they arrived they found an ambulance outside. As she entered the house, she was told that her father had died. She recalls that her husband was asked to identify the body. She cannot recall seeing her father's body but thinks that it was removed by the ambulance crew. She later spoke to her mother who told her that her father had been sitting in his favourite chair, watching a football programme (or possibly the George Formby show) on television, when he just stopped breathing and died. Mrs Parr does not recall her mother mentioning that Shipman or any other doctor had visited her father that day, although she concedes that this was a possibility because he did visit quite often.
Mrs Tunnicliffe remembers things slightly differently. She was at home on the evening of 9th
January 1978, when she too received a telephone call from her mother to say that her father was ill. She immediately went to her parents' flat together with her husband and daughter. When she arrived, her mother told her that a doctor had been to see her father. Her mother did not say that her father was dead. Mrs Tunnicliffe went into the bedroom where she saw her father. She thought he was sleeping but she later found out he had died. Her mother told her that her father had been watching 'Coronation Street' on the television when she realised that he looked unwell. She contacted the doctor. Mrs Tunnicliffe does not know at what time the doctor visited her father but she gained the impression from her mother that the doctor had seen her father shortly before he died. She is, however, unsure of this.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that Mr Wardle died of a right-sided cerebrovascular accident on 9th
January 1978 and that he had last seen Mr Wardle alive on the day of his death. He said that he had seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination. He dated the counterfoil 10th
January 1978.
Mr Wardle was cremated but the cremation documents have not survived.
Conclusion
The evidence in this case is inconclusive. Mrs Parr and Mrs Tunnicliffe recall different conversations with their mother. If Mrs Parr is right, the doctor could not have seen Mr Wardle alive. If Mrs Tunnicliffe is right, he did. Shipman said that he saw Mr Wardle alive that day. Although Shipman's claims should never be taken at face value, it seems likely that Shipman did see Mr Wardle alive on 9th
January and, if he did, it might well have been very shortly before death.
That possibility gives rise to cause for concern. There is no evidence that Shipman injected Mr Wardle or treated him in any way. However, it is possible that he did so. He might well have been alone with Mr Wardle for some time. I note that there is some evidence that an ambulance attended the flat but it appears that Mr Wardle was already dead.
I note that Shipman certified that Mr Wardle died of a right-sided cerebrovascular accident. As Dr John Grenville has said in his generic evidence, a stroke which affects one side of the body is usually caused by the occlusion of a blood vessel in the cortical region of the brain. It does not usually lead to sudden death. Such strokes are not usually fatal, although they can be. If they are to be fatal, death usually follows the development of the stroke over a period of at least several hours and more often two to three days. During this time, the patient's level of consciousness sinks gradually.
There are features of this case which are similar to later cases in which I have found that Shipman has killed. The suddenness of the death and Shipman's possible presence at or shortly before the death give rise to suspicion. Another suspicious feature is the calling of an ambulance which arrives too late to take the patient to hospital. A sudden death supposedly from a right-sided stroke gives rise to suspicion.
I regret to say that I will be unable to reach a positive conclusion in this case. As I have indicated there are causes for suspicion. However, the circumstances of the death are not sufficiently clear for me to be able to say, even on the balance of probabilities, whether this was a natural death or whether Shipman was unlawfully involved.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001