The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Edith Wibberley
Introduction
Mrs Edith Wibberley died at her home, 19 Cheetham Fold Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 18th
December 1984 at the age of 76. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
The death has not been investigated by the police and there has been no inquest.
In July 2001, Mrs Wibberley's home care worker, Mrs Shirley Pleva, expressed concern to the Inquiry about the circumstances of Mrs Wibberley's death. The Inquiry has investigated the death and has taken statements from Mrs Pleva, Mrs Sylvia Thelwell (Mrs Wibberley's daughter) and Mrs Julia Wibberley (Mrs Wibberley's daughter-in-law). The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1984, the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD).
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Wibberley was widowed in about 1970. For some years after that, she lived with her son, Mr Roy Wibberley, and his family. She lived alone at Cheetham Fold Road from about 1980. She seemed to enjoy quite good health, although she was a heavy smoker. At some stage, she had blood clotting problems for which she had to take warfarin. She was a sociable woman and enjoyed the company of friends who would visit her.
Mrs Julia Wibberley says that her mother-in-law's health deteriorated during the last year of her life. In particular, during the last six months, she had a series of 'mini-strokes' occurring about once a month. Mrs Julia Wibberley could always tell if her mother-in-law had suffered a 'mini-stroke', because her speech would be impaired for a day or two.
In about September 1984, Mrs Wibberley fell and broke her hip. She was in Tameside General Hospital for about six weeks. On her return home, she was confined to her flat and used a Zimmer frame to walk about indoors. She was assigned a home care worker and her family also provided a great deal of support.
During the few weeks before her death, Mrs Wibberley mentioned several times to Mrs Pleva that Shipman was going to arrange for her to be seen by a specialist. Mrs Pleva had the impression that Mrs Wibberley was becoming frustrated by the delay. Mrs Pleva has a vague recollection that she herself telephoned the surgery to chase up the referral.
Mrs Julia Wibberley recalls that Mrs Wibberley's health deteriorated further during the last two weeks of her life, so that she was spending most of her time in bed.
Mrs Julia Wibberley visited her mother-in-law at about 8.30am on Monday, 17th
December 1984 to find that she was stammering badly. She suspected another minor stroke. She arranged for Shipman to visit later that day. She returned to see her mother-in-law at about 4pm. Mrs Wibberley told her that Shipman had been to see her and that he was coming back the next day to take a sample of blood. This puzzled Mrs Julia Wibberley slightly because she could not see how the taking of a blood sample could help. Shipman had not left a prescription. At about 8.30pm, when Mrs Julia Wibberley visited for the third time that day, her mother-in-law was still stammering.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Julia Wibberley visited her mother-in-law at about 8.30am on Tuesday, 18th
December 1984. She helped her to wash and use the commode and made her some breakfast. Mrs Wibberley seemed no better and no worse than the previous day. Mrs Julia Wibberley left the flat at about 9.15am to go to work. Mrs Pleva was due to arrive soon afterwards.
Mrs Wibberley used to leave her door key with a neighbour, Mrs Thelwell, the mother-in-law of Mrs Sylvia Thelwell. On this morning, Mrs Pleva collected the key from her as usual and let herself in. Mrs Pleva recalls that Mrs Wibberley seemed to be her 'normal self'. She did not complain of being ill and did not say that the doctor was due to visit her. Mrs Pleva stayed for about half an hour then left.
Mrs Pleva returned to see Mrs Wibberley at about 1pm. She again went to collect the key but Mrs Thelwell told her that Shipman had taken it and was with Mrs Wibberley.
Mrs Pleva went to Mrs Wibberley's flat and found the front door open. She went in and walked upstairs, but kept quiet, as she did not want to disturb Shipman in the course of a consultation. When she reached the top of the stairs, however, she could see Shipman, facing the door, kneeling on Mrs Wibberley's bed, with Mrs Wibberley's head resting on his knees. He had his hand against the side of her neck as though feeling for a pulse. Mrs Wibberley's legs were hanging over the side of the bed. Mrs Pleva had the impression that Mrs Wibberley had been sitting on the side of the bed and had leaned or fallen backwards.
Shipman appeared startled when he saw Mrs Pleva and he asked her who she was. She told him that she was Mrs Wibberley's home care worker and asked him what had happened. Shipman said that Mrs Wibberley had had a massive stroke. Mrs Pleva said she would telephone for an ambulance. Shipman told her not to as it would be a waste of time. He said something like, 'She won't be long before she's dead'. He then said, to Mrs Pleva's surprise, 'I had got her a specialist and what a waste of bloody time that was'. He apologised for swearing and asked Mrs Pleva to put the kettle on so that they could have a cup of tea. Mrs Pleva refused as she did not think it right to drink tea whilst Mrs Wibberley was dying. Shipman then asked Mrs Pleva if she knew who was Mrs Wibberley's next of kin. Mrs Pleva knew Mrs Sylvia Thelwell from school and Shipman said, 'Tell her to hurry up or she'll be dead before she gets here'. It seems likely that Mrs Pleva contacted both Mrs Sylvia Thelwell and Mrs Julia Wibberley.
Mrs Julia Wibberley arrived at the flat within three or four minutes of receiving Mrs Pleva's call. She found Shipman in the bedroom, standing at the foot of the bed. Mrs Wibberley's body was lying across the bed, as described by Mrs Pleva. Mrs Wibberley was dressed in nightclothes. Shipman seemed surprised to see Mrs Julia Wibberley, although he was not flustered and his manner was quite professional. He asked Mrs Wibberley to help him to move the body on the bed. While they were doing this, he told Mrs Julia Wibberley that he had found her mother-in-law in that position. He said he would have to wait a little longer before he would be able to pronounce her dead. After about another five minutes, he checked his watch and said that he had now waited for ten minutes. He felt Mrs Wibberley's wrist, as if feeling for a pulse, and then said that he would pronounce her dead. He mentioned the time, which Mrs Julia Wibberley recalls was some time after 3pm.
According to Mrs Pleva, it took Mrs Sylvia Thelwell about 20 minutes to reach her mother's flat. During this time, Shipman remained in the bedroom. Mrs Pleva waited at the flat but did not go back into the bedroom. Mrs Pleva is sure that she heard Shipman say either, 'She's dead' or 'She's gone' as Mrs Thelwell entered the flat. Mrs Sylvia Thelwell's recollection is that Mrs Pleva had already left when she arrived at the flat. She found Shipman in the bedroom and her mother in the same position as has been described by Mrs Pleva. Mrs Sylvia Thelwell remembers that her sister-in-law, Mrs Julia Wibberley, helped Shipman to lay the body straight on the bed.
Mrs Wibberley's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for the day of her death.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman recorded that Mrs Wibberley had died on 18th
December 1984. He said that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension. He said that he had last seen Mrs Wibberley alive on
'17th 18 Dec'
. There would be no post-mortem examination.
Mrs Wibberley was cremated, but the cremation documentation has not survived.
Conclusion
Mrs Wibberley was unwell in the days before her death. It appears that she had suffered a series of minor strokes. She must have been at considerable risk of suffering a fatal stroke. However, on the morning of 18th
December, her condition was unexceptional. I do not think her daughter-in-law would have left her if she had the impression that her condition had deteriorated. Shipman was expected, but only because he had said he wanted to take a blood sample. It would have been a remarkable coincidence if Mrs Wibberley had suffered a sudden fatal stroke just at the time of Shipman's visit. It would also be remarkable if she had suffered a stroke while alone during the morning and had died just at the time when Shipman called to take a blood sample. Dr John Grenville said in his generic evidence that such a coincidence might occur perhaps once in a general practitioner's professional lifetime. With Shipman, it seems to have happened time and time again. I am satisfied that events such as this were not coincidences: they were killings. The notion that Mrs Wibberley's death occurred in Shipman's presence, but without his involvement, is so inherently implausible that I discount it. I am sure that he killed her.
This case represents an early example of Shipman having given a lethal injection under the pretext of taking a blood sample. It was a device he was to use on many occasions thereafter. Taking a blood sample gave him the opportunity to introduce a needle into the patient's vein. Most patients do not watch such a procedure and even those who do would not necessarily realise that they were being injected. It appears to me that, when Shipman visited Mrs Wibberley on 17th December, he must have decided to kill her. I think perhaps that he did not have any or enough opiate with him to inject her that day and made an arrangement to return the next day, ostensibly to take a blood sample but, in fact, to kill her. I think Mrs Julia Wibberley was right to be puzzled about Shipman's wish to take a blood sample. It is hard to think what genuine purpose it could serve.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001