The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Annie Wood
Introduction
Mrs Annie Wood died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Monday, 26th
March 1984 at the age of 82. It is not known whether she was registered as a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs June Wood (Mrs Wood's daughter-in-law), and Mrs Lilian Stansfield (the former manager at Charnley House). The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1984, the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary, and the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Death (MCCD). Mrs Wood's medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Wood lived with her husband until about 1981, when he suffered a stroke. They then moved to live with their son, Mr Joseph Wood and his wife, Mrs June Wood. That arrangement lasted for about a year until the couple moved into sheltered accommodation. Mrs Wood's husband died soon afterwards but she continued to live independently for about a further two years. By then she had become frail and had had several falls. On Friday, 10th
February 1984, she was admitted to Charnley House.
Mr Wood and his wife visited Mrs Wood twice a week, once at the weekend and once during the week. Mrs June Wood recalls that her mother-in-law enjoyed the company at Charnley House and always appeared to be well looked after. Whenever she visited, Mrs Wood would be sitting in a chair in the lounge with other residents. Mrs June Wood does not remember Mrs Wood ever complaining of feeling unwell.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
The Charnley House diary for 16th
March 1984 records that Mrs Wood had a slight temperature and was
'aching all over'
. For a few days, she remained unwell and unable to eat very much. Her condition was noted to have improved on Monday, 19th
March. The following day she fell out of bed and banged her head but sustained no other injury. On Thursday, 22nd
March, Mrs Wood refused to eat or drink at teatime, although she drank a glass of Complan. The following day she was seen by Shipman. He noted that she was still weak following a bout of influenza. He left a prescription but the diary does not say what it was for. The diary entry for 24th
March records that Mrs Wood should be encouraged to do more for herself; she was seen as having become too dependent on the staff.
Mrs June Wood last saw her mother-in-law alive on Sunday, 25th
March, the day before she died. She remembers that Mrs Wood appeared well and was sitting in the lounge as usual. Mrs June Wood and her husband left just before lunch was served and, as they stood up to leave, Mrs Wood said that there was no need for them to come again. They replied that they would of course see her during the week as usual and that it was no problem for them to do so.
The Day of the Death
The night report in the Charnley House diary for 25-26th
March 1984 records as follows:
'Mrs
Wood:- very poorly during the night burning up
one minute, shivering next, rash on
left side just above waist.
We had to change her completely
4 times during the night, left
in bed as she couldn't stand
or hold herself up'
.
The morning report for Monday, 26th
March, was completed by Mrs Stansfield. She recorded that a Dr Beenstock had visited in order to leave a prescription for one of the other residents and Dr Moysey (one of the Donneybrook doctors) had called to see three residents, but not Mrs Wood. The latter half of the report records as follows:
'MRS A WOOD DR SHIPMAN S/F
(
sent for
)
8-30AM
MRS WOOD TAKEN A LITTLE BREAKFAST & LUNCH. BUT
PASSED AWAY SUDDENLY 12-30PM.
(instructions left)
'
.
The afternoon report records that Shipman came to see Mrs Wood, although the time is not stated. It also records that the funeral director called for Mrs Wood at 7pm. Towards the end of the afternoon report, following these other entries, it is recorded that Mrs Wood's relatives had been informed of the death at 5.30pm.
Mrs Stansfield says that it is surprising that Mrs Wood ate some lunch and then died. She notes that there is nothing in the daily diary entry for that morning to suggest that Shipman visited Charnley House before Mrs Wood died that day. She says that if Shipman had visited Mrs Wood during her shift, she would have made a note of that fact.
Mrs June Wood recalls receiving a telephone call from a member of staff at Charnley House shortly after returning home from work at about 5.30pm. She was told of the death. She and her husband went to Charnley House, where they saw a member of staff, who had an account of the day's events. They were told that Mrs Annie Wood had 'slipped away' earlier that afternoon. This description contrasts with the diary entry, which suggests a sudden death. They were told that Mrs Wood had woken up that morning feeling tired and had, therefore, stayed in bed. A doctor, who had attended Charnley House to see another resident, had examined Mrs Wood and said that she was tired but that there was nothing physically wrong with her. He said she should be left in bed to rest. The member of staff also said that a doctor had seen Mrs Wood later that day, although it was unclear whether the doctor had seen Mrs Wood before or after she had died. Mrs June Wood does not remember the name of that doctor.
Mrs Wood's name appears in Shipman's visits book on 26th
March 1984, although it is not possible to establish from the entry whether Shipman saw Mrs Wood before or after her death.
Certification
Mrs June Wood and her husband called at Shipman's surgery the following day in order to collect the MCCD. The death had come as a great surprise to them, but Shipman said that Mrs Wood was old and frail and that he would certify that the cause of her death was old age. The MCCD has not been recovered, but its counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman recorded that he had last seen Mrs Wood alive on 23rd
March 1984, which is consistent with the entries in the Charnley House diary. He said that a post-mortem examination would not take place and that he had seen the body after death. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 26th
March 1984, the day of the death.
Conclusion
Mrs Wood had become very frail in the weeks before her death. She seems to have been very unwell during the night before she died. The daily diary entry suggests that she was suffering from a fever. On the day of her death, it appears that she stayed in bed but was well enough to eat a little breakfast and lunch. There was some concern for her health, however, as Shipman was sent for at 8.30am, which is about the time that the surgery opened. If Mrs June Wood's recollection is right, her mother-in-law was seen by another doctor that morning. That is possible, as it is clear that Dr Moysey and Dr Beenstock were at Charnley House at some stage. If another doctor saw her, the fact was not noted in the daily diary. I do not think there can have been any serious concern for Mrs Wood's health, as it was the practice at Charnley House to warn relatives if a resident was expected to die. Mrs June Wood says that the death came as a great surprise to her and her husband. It does appear to me that Mrs Wood's death was quite sudden and unexpected.
The evidence given by members of Charnley House staff suggests that Shipman usually visited at about lunchtime. Residents took lunch at about midday and there would be a shift change at 1pm. According to Mrs Stansfield's diary entry, which she would usually make at the end of her shift, Mrs Wood died suddenly at about 12.30pm. That would be after lunch but before the end of the morning shift. It would also be at about the time when Shipman might well be expected to visit. I know from other cases I have examined that the Charnley House diaries are not always complete and wholly accurate. I am also aware of evidence to suggest that during this period, the doors to the home were not kept locked and there was not a strict rule that a doctor must always be accompanied by a member of staff while seeing a patient. I cannot rule out the possibility that, unbeknown to Mrs Stansfield, Shipman visited Charnley House before Mrs Wood's death on 26th
March 1984. I say that notwithstanding the fact that Shipman's claim that he had last seen Mrs Wood alive on 23rd
March is consistent with the Charnley House diaries.
Mrs Wood's death was quite sudden and it appears to me that Shipman ought not to have certified the cause as 'old age'. If the death really did occur suddenly but naturally at 12.30pm, Shipman could not have known the cause of the sudden death and he should have referred the death to the coroner with a view to a post-mortem examination.
I regret to say that there is insufficient evidence for me to determine whether Mrs Wood died of natural causes or was killed by Shipman.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001