The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ellen Walker
Introduction
Miss Ellen Walker died at The Sycamores, a residential home for the elderly, Victoria Street, Hyde on Saturday, 2nd
March 1991 at the age of 88. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was carcinoma of the pancreas.
There has been no police investigation into the death and no inquest.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Pauline Anne Chorlton (Miss Walker's great-niece) and a number of former members of staff from The Sycamores. These are Ms Pamela Jean Ogden, Ms Patricia Marrow, Ms Ethel Clayton, Ms Jean Marie Lohan, Ms Joan Williams (a former care assistant, who started working at The Sycamores after Miss Walker had died), Ms Marion Rowbotham and Mrs Helen Oliver (the former manager of The Sycamores). The Inquiry has also had access to Miss Walker's general practitioner records, Shipman's visits book for 1991, the Donneybrook Surgery duty doctor transfer diary, the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation forms.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Walker had a long-standing history of schizophrenia. She lost contact with her family. Mrs Chorlton did not see her great-aunt for many years before her death. She has provided a statement based on what she was told by members of staff at The Sycamores following Miss Walker's death.
The medical records show that in January 1991, Shipman visited Miss Walker and noted that she was obviously jaundiced, her liver was just palpable and she had lost weight. He made a tentative diagnosis of cancer and requested a domiciliary visit by a consultant. Miss Walker was seen by a consultant surgeon a few days later and he diagnosed carcinoma at the head of the pancreas. Miss Walker was admitted to Tameside General Hospital for a cholecystojejunostomy, followed a few days later by a gastrojejunostomy. She was returned to The Sycamores on 23rd
February 1991. The discharge summary mentions that the surgical wound was not healing well.
Of the members of staff from The Sycamores, Mrs Oliver appears to have the best recollection of Miss Walker. She remembers that Miss Walker was admitted to The Sycamores two to three years before her death. She was suffering from advanced dementia and at some stage developed cancer. She remembers that in the weeks before her death, Miss Walker was confined to bed and was passing in and out of consciousness. She was yellow in appearance. When awake, she was very confused.
Mrs Oliver says that the practice at The Sycamores was for a member of staff to remain with a patient if the death was thought to be imminent.
According to the medical records, Shipman saw Miss Walker on only two occasions following her return to The Sycamores. The records are very brief and contain no reference to the administration or prescription of any pain-relieving medication. As Miss Walker was suffering from cancer, these records are unlikely to be complete. It may be that Miss Walker's pain was adequately controlled by oral medication. It is possible that the district nursing service was attending regularly to give pain-relieving injections. It is possible, although there is no evidence of it, that Shipman was giving regular injections. The entry in the medical records for 27th
February says only
'TERMINAL ILLNESS'
. The final entry, dated 1st
March 1990, records that Miss Walker was unconscious. Miss Walker's name appears in Shipman's visits book for that day.
The Day of the Death
None of the staff members who have provided statements recalls the circumstances of Miss Walker's death. Ms Lohan thinks that she started work at 6pm on Saturday, 2nd
March 1991 and that Miss Walker had died just before she came on duty.
There is no evidence that Shipman visited Miss Walker on the day of her death. However, as she was terminally ill, there is a real possibility that he might have called on her on the morning of Saturday, 2nd
March. He often did make some visits on Saturdays, even when he was not on weekend duty. However, Miss Walker's name does not appear in his visits book for that day. According to the generic evidence, the Donneybrook doctors would each hold a Saturday morning surgery until about 10am. Requests for a visit received after that time would be attended to by the doctor who was on out of hours duty for the weekend. According to the duty doctor transfer diary, Dr Jeffery Moysey was on duty on 2nd
March 1991. If the staff at The Sycamores had requested a visit for Miss Walker after about 10.00am, it is likely that Dr Moysey would have attended.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. Shipman recorded that he had last seen Miss Walker alive on 1st
March 1991, the day before her death. That is consistent with the visits book. He said that another medical practitioner had seen the body after death. It is likely that this was either Dr Moysey or a doctor employed by the deputising service. Shipman said that there would not be a post-mortem examination. The cause of death was carcinoma of the pancreas.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Miss Walker died at 4pm on 2nd
March 1991 and that he had attended her during her last illness for three months. He omitted to say when he had last seen Miss Walker alive and the omission was not made good by the crematorium staff or the medical referee. He said that he had seen the body four days after death. The cause of death was as stated on the MCCD counterfoil and the mode of death was said to be a coma lasting
'72 hours or so'
. This answer was said to be based on his own observations and information provided by the staff at the home. Shipman noted that Miss Walker had recently undergone an operation to relieve jaundice. He said that the matron of The Sycamores, probably Mrs Oliver, had been present at the moment of death. Mrs Oliver does not remember being present at the death but it would be the usual policy for a member of staff to be present if it was known that the death was imminent.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered Miss Walker's medical records and then separately the cremation forms. In respect of each, he concluded that no suspicion attached to the death.
Conclusion
It appears likely that Miss Walker died of natural causes, as certified by Shipman.
The diagnosis of pancreatic cancer was properly established by hospital investigation. This is an untreatable condition and is invariably fatal. Miss Walker's death was expected and wholly explicable.
There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman saw Miss Walker shortly before her death, at a time when he might have given her a drug which directly caused or hastened her death. The strange feature of this case is that there is no record of a prescription for any pain-relieving medication and it would seem likely that Miss Walker would have required some form of sedative or analgesia. If there were a record of the giving of analgesic or sedative drugs, I would have no concerns at all about this death. It is only because there is no record of any such drug that I suspect that Shipman might have given unrecorded doses of sedative or pain-relieving drugs on 27th
February and 1st
March and even on 2nd
March. It is possible that those doses were larger than appropriate and had the effect making Miss Walker deeply unconscious. I have come across one case where Shipman made a note in his visits book that he had given a very elderly patient an injection of 100mg of Largactil. That is a very large dose and would send a frail and elderly patient into a deep coma. In that state, the patient is vulnerable to bronchopneumonia and death. There is a possibility that Shipman did something of that kind in the present case, with the intention of hastening Miss Walker's death.
However, there is no evidence that he did so and I consider that it is likely that Miss Walker's death was entirely natural.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001