The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Ada Wandless
Introduction
Mrs Ada Wandless died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Wednesday, 12th
April 1972 at the age of 55. She had been admitted to PGI about ten days earlier. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was hypertensive encephalopathy, caused by hypertension, and that congestive heart failure contributed to the death. At the time of Mrs Wandless’ death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Miss Janet Wandless, Mrs Wandless’ daughter. Mrs Wandless’ husband, Mr James William Wandless, who was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’), has since died. A statement was also taken from Mrs Linda Byford, who was at the time a nursing sister on Ward 1. Mrs Wandless’ hospital records are no longer available. Mrs Wandless’ body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. There was no post-mortem examination.
Miss Wandless has expressed concern about the circumstances of her mother’s death after reading on cremation Form B that Shipman had stated that he was present with her mother at the time of death.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers.
Personal Background
Mrs Wandless was married. Miss Wandless was 18 and living with her parents at the time of her mother’s death.
Mrs Wandless was a sociable woman and liked to go out to bingo or for a drink with friends. She smoked about 20 cigarettes a day. She had respiratory problems but these did not affect her capacity to enjoy a full and active life. About two years before her death, problems with her breathing increased and she had to curtail her activities. About six months before her death, her condition worsened. She saw her general practitioner quite frequently and became generally less active.
In November 1971, Mrs Wandless was admitted to Ackton Hospital for about six weeks. She underwent tests which revealed a heart problem, the nature of which is not clear. It appears that one of the valves in her heart was not working properly. It seems that Mrs Wandless had also been told that she had low blood pressure. In the light of her medical history and her later stroke, I believe it to be more likely that her problem was with raised blood pressure (hypertension). Mrs Wandless remained in bed throughout her time in hospital. Miss Wandless does not know what treatment her mother was given. However, on her return home, Mrs Wandless was very
‘shaky’
and could not manage the stairs. A bed was brought downstairs for her.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
Miss Wandless recalls that, about a week before her mother’s death, she arrived home to find an ambulance at the door. Her mother was being taken to hospital. A neighbour said that Mrs Wandless had had a stroke. However, at that time she was still conscious.
Miss Wandless thinks that she saw her mother the day after she was admitted to PGI. Mrs Wandless was in a cubicle or side ward and was by now unconscious. This was a shock to her daughter. The practice on Ward 1 was to accommodate in the cubicles or side wards those patients who were seriously ill or whose deaths were expected imminently. Miss Wandless did not speak to any member of the medical staff and was not given any explanation of her mother’s condition. Nor was she advised that her mother was unlikely to live long. She visited her mother during normal visiting hours. On subsequent occasions, Mrs Wandless’ condition remained the same; she appeared to be sleeping. So far as Miss Wandless knows, she never regained consciousness.
The Day of the Death
On 12th
April 1972, Miss Wandless arrived at the hospital at about 7pm. Her father was waiting for her in the corridor. He told her that her mother had died and that he had not been with her when she died; he believed that she had been alone. The family was not given any information or explanation about the death by the medical staff.
Certification
Shipman completed cremation Form B. He stated that the death had occurred at
‘17.45hrs’
. Miss Wandless believes that this is probably correct. Shipman said he had attended Mrs Wandless during her last illness for a period of ten days. Although Miss Wandless thought her mother had been in hospital for a little less time than that, the difference is immaterial. Shipman claimed to have examined the body immediately after the death. He provided the same causes of death as had been recorded on the death certificate. He said that the mode of death was a coma of four to five days’ duration. That does not accord completely with Miss Wandless’ recollection that her mother had been unconscious since the day following her admission. However, the difference is not important as it is common ground that Mrs Wandless had been unconscious for several days before death. Shipman said that Sister Byford had nursed Mrs Wandless in her final illness and that he himself had been present at the moment of death. He did not name any other person as having been present at the moment of death.
Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain completed Form C. He recorded that he had seen and questioned Shipman and also that he had seen and questioned the nursing staff on Ward 1. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Mrs Byford has no recollection of Mrs Wandless’ death and says that she was never questioned about the circumstances of a death by a Form C doctor.
Conclusion
In the absence of any medical records, it is not possible to form a clear view about Mrs Wandless’ illness. However, Miss Wandless recalls that her mother was unconscious for about a week before her death and this is not dissimilar to the information provided by Shipman. It seems entirely likely that Mrs Wandless suffered from very severely raised blood pressure which affected her brain and resulted in loss of consciousness. It seems likely that Mrs Wandless’ death was imminent and it is entirely possible that the death was completely natural.
The only cause for concern is that Shipman stated on Form B that he was present at Mrs Wandless’ death and did not state that any other person was present with him. It was most unusual for other doctors to be alone with a patient at death and quite hard to imagine how that could come about in the ordinary course of hospital life. If a nurse had asked Shipman to attend to a patient and he formed the view that the patient was close to death, he might stay at the bedside but I would expect that a nurse would also stay. It would not be expected that the nurse would leave the bedside and that the doctor would stay awaiting the death. If Shipman had not been asked by a nurse to attend Mrs Wandless, and if he was indeed present at the death, it seems that he must have entered the cubicle alone and in the absence of a nurse. It that was so, it would be surprising and potentially suspicious. Shipman would have had the opportunity to administer something to Mrs Wandless that could have had the effect of hastening her death. However, as I have explained in
Chapter Seven
, there were occasions when Shipman said that he was present alone at the death of a patient when that was not so. In this case, I am far from sure that he was present alone at the moment of death, although he might have been.
It seems to me that, on 12th
April 1972, Mrs Wandless was gravely ill and had not long to live. Her death in the late afternoon may well have been natural but I cannot rule out the possibility that Shipman administered something that hastened her death. Indeed, I have some suspicion that he did so.
I very much regret that I have had to raise these doubts so many years after the death and I am sorry for the distress this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI, once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001